

[PAGE 1]

XXVIL} CHIKITSASTHANAM 455
freaefia a2 qtsifta WEI | Ae TERETTET TAT Teaeihea It 29 |
Dogas, in spite of having contradictory Properties, do not destroy each other
because of innate adjustment as even fatal poison does not affect snakes, [ 287 ]
ar at —
farts tarot Perarafairrsy | feator qafiqd Brera fapaREd 1 eco 1
Now the summing up verse—
Thus etiology, symptoms and treatment of diseases caused in three vital
organs are dealt with in details in this chapter on treatment concerned with these
three vital oragans, [ 288 il
wafudaed at qonaftdestsat eeqmeght] faficereat
Prvitafatiftad am afgsitseara RR
Thus ends the twenty sixth chapter on treatment of diseases of the
three vital organs in Cikitsasthana in the treatise composed
by Agnivega, redacted by Caraka and reconstructed
by Drdhabala as it was not available, [ 26 ]
aafiatseqra:
CHAPTER XXVII
aaa KeeaeutaPafeardt saeqrera tt tI
Now (1) shall expound the chapter on treatment of drustambha. Eby
aft @ ere aarararae 11 211
As propounded by Lord Atreya, [2]
fren gern arat wat @ avira | att azaateat grata vam 3 11
wibaftrea! lafwaat ge as dad ogee i 2 ii
reed oy eat aoe gay car | fkeramarat fk wetarta Fray 1 4 1
Quisitsecraa: afizerer arta Rava | | wea: ares GAR aera rere aa: 11 & I
aka Kat Tem Tey STM asENIT aE TEStAAAES: Il 1
faeiensgatart sioistet aera | Rang hreitearcargatenntaa: tt < 11
Rrecaranentateareranarit: | sgareqaararenraaatntcit tl & u
arava fart ate arardieazat ae | BTeASST aMearge aaah: ReehAE: th Go AI


[PAGE 2]

CARAKA-SAMHITA { CH.
qeaq afeangte WA Adadtens: | afedagitery — earereafamA | WU
Retadt waht qiseg feafrd aati fasta Racmeted sagena: BH! Ul &R
diteqrarragtazresragtrasaa: | Rgegenataer at Re Frere | eR I
ae Sem angen aratrashga q | earetedliteeaRerteraey a I C8 Ul
sad arafaantaetirearternsat: laeta offer agtat aad aa eal
Agnivesa put up his doubt to his teacher ( Atreya ), endowed with highest
splendour of intellectual attainments and penance like Sumeru mountain with the
moon and the sun and abode of wisdom, restraint, memory, understanding, know!-
edge, eminence and forbearance—O Lord! the five evacuative measures, singly
or collectively, are said as remedy for all the disorders but is there any disease
which is not amenable to them though it is curable ? The teacher replied—Yes, it
is Grustambha. Then he was queried about etiology, symptoms and treatmeat.
He said thus :
When one eats fatty, hot, light and cold food when the previous food is
digested partially and mosty undigested, and due to liquid or dry food, curd, milk,
meat of domestic, marshy and aquatic animals, flour preparations, damaged wine,
excessive day-sleep and vigil, under-eating, over-eating, exertion, fear, suppression
of urges and unctuousness, ama accumulated in bowels and accompanied
by medas obstructs vata etc. (dogas ) and due to heaviness proceeds
shortly to thighs through lower blood vessels etc. and pervading legs, shanks
and thighs, the morbidity aggravated by the strength of medas makes them out of
volition and with restricted movements.
‘As still water in full and deep big lake remains stable and without agitation,
kapha resides in thighs and producing heaviness, exhaustion, contracture, burning
sensation, pain, numbness, tearing pain, quivering and piercing in the body
takes away life.
The disease is called trustambha because kapha with medas subduing vata
and pitta stiftens thighs with immobility and coldness.
Premonitory symptoms are—brooding over, sleep, excessive feeling of wetness,
anorexia, fever, horripilation, vomiting and lassitude in shanks and thighs. [ 3-15 ]
amafghremaraes ary aaa, GA raat aad AA: BPS AAT I! TE Al
Due to ignorance when under suspicion of vatavyadhi, one applies unction
it further aggravates and causes lassitude, numbness and difficult lifting o”
legs. [ 16 ]


[PAGE 3]

XXVI) CHIKITSASTHANAM 457
a@eatert waenqeadga | wg a stat eaRt aftaeqat a afer ai tot
gem Ged wat aTSR aTertvac: | seat fH etraTaS Tat a Aaa Ul Re It
aa qreneatarat aaa: Gat wag | HeeTTRTAT Cra STATA AAT MRS Il
Excessive malaise of shanks and thighs, continuous burning sensation and
pain, feet ache when put on the ground and are unable to perceive cold touch,
the patient becomes quite incapable of standing, pressing, moving and causing to
move and feels as if the thighs were broken off and are borne by some one else.
When the patient trembles and is affected with burning sensation, distress
and piercing pain, Urustambha should be known as incurable otherwise particu-
larly the new one should be treated. | 17-19 ]
wera aed art aattad tea aa are aenrafeataa Frc I Re Il
gaa Sort fred det aferad a | aeaettact @q a aaa fatary ll 22 I
ee area fda aaa Baa! edarasedt a etearengaraéa Ul 2 I
aaraaear arash aeahnpettang | wea a araaateat eave agree: RA
aracard fe aedeararnt: casas axat: | a TET Gaga we Hearts exsra |e
In this disease, none of the unction, enema, purgation and emesis is applied
because of the following reasons, listen.
Unction and enema lead to aggravation of kapha. Purgation is not able to
extricate kapha situated there.
It is casy to eliminate kapha and pitta situated in kaphasthana ( seat of kapha )
both of them can be eliminated by purgatior if situated in amaSaya, even all dosas
situated in pakvaSaya can be eliminated with enemas by striking at the root ( of
morbidity ) but when the two ( ama and kapha ) are located in the seat of vata, as
they are stiffened due to its coldness, they can not be extricated easily as water
yom a low ditch. [ 20-24 ]
aren Sere Pret qraei attaot car | genet fea Gatehrmearen nrg: 11 Il
ag | eataerr | aaqUTATRat ara | TrRCsATgaTASAS IATA: I KI
‘ sameeren =| gaatfahr 1 2901
araftendiamt etieemeriia al aggre freqeat Heersafeareat tl RI
aagt wend Pret agar ae at frag! car paentdteatagrenareaftr tt 8 11
aad araait ge arate weg aa!
Physician acting with reason should apply constant diminishing and drying
measures as pacificatory treatment because of the abundance of kapha and ama.
One should give invariably the diet of barley, §yamaka and kodo with salt-
free vegetable such as tender leaves of sunisanpaka, nimba, arka, vetasa and


[PAGE 4]

CARAKA-SAMHITA (CH.
aragvadha, vayast and other bitters Iike kiravellika etc? cooked with water and
oil keeping the patiént on roughening measures.
Use of alkalis, aristas, haritaki, honey-water and pippali alleviate urust-
ambha,
The patient should take samafgi, mocarasa and bilva with honey and also
(1) Srivestaka, udicya, devadaru and tagara and (2) candana, dhataki, kustha,
talisa and nalada in the same way. [ 25-29 ]
aed etiaat Shei cua: farmttfeotez 11 30 1
gaa ate & aat HeRdeoitT | fart faruatys ard tage a 201
aed fasaqeith 2agte attaaty, | Rae east a fect gay ara fate BRU
adtgmdaaitar, rearqeaerar |
(1) Musta, haritaki, lodhra, padamka and  tiktarohini, (2) devadiru,
haridra, darubaridra, vaca and katurohini, (3) pippalf, pippalimila, sarala and
devadaru, ( 4) cavya, citraka root, devadaru and haritaki, (5) bhallataka, pippali
and pippalimtla.
* These formulations said in half-verses should be taken as paste with honey
to alleviate urustambha. [ 30-32 ]
aiget wai pelt cerned a TANT HI 82
mained oat aca eee sar! fated get sitar anftortssegary tt 3 11
enitd afuaveaisoqeerrafiarrad | qatafatact eo fara actor ti 24 11
qaarrag qt cfafeaarantt ar | equreitatatrat qed Aatact Farr tt BR I
Bue ras gee ast weattenitey | Seager qe waits at waegaH | 29 Il
wat eran tH feta maaan | met feast get aot azwttficot tt 3c Ul
foe aaa SorpReararfsat ac: |
Powder of Sariges{a, madana, danti, indrayava, vaca, miirya, aragvadha,
patha, karafija and kulaka should be taken with equal quantity—honey or dissolved
in water or curd-scum added with honey.
In the same way, mdrva, ativisa, kustha, citraka and katurohini should be
taken or guggulu dipped in cow's urine for the whole night.
Powder of swarnaksiri, ativisa, musta, tejovati, vaca, devadaru, citraka,
kusiha, path’ and katurohini should be taken with honey or dissolved. in water
added with honey.
Phali (vata), vyaghranakha and nagakeSara should be taken with honey. The
patient of Grustambha should take the powder of triphala, pippali,’ musta, cavya
and Katurohini with’honey. [33-98 ]


[PAGE 5]

—*
XXVIII] CHIKITSASTHANAM 459
AGIOS EAT: ar eeah Hy 1 Be A ‘
THT wAsTAe: gets mise | eaoaraMaafagarniqar Ul go lt
eaters Brat atarrare: | digaoft gaeata crett ahgeat gar tl 82 Ul
Ramen aaafhfaaia | ate vad aenqates atsts ar ferate we
gutlteadieaad we Fa | awrasate a ada: art wate tl 82
eet arn ameqeermataa: fea! 893 aera we quent aaenPrrar lee
22 woreda frafad cassee | ara aa sed Aaetateneray tt U4
queqenatitfradarattncgg | Tawa freratqearrergeazat: | Be I
aver: at aT gHeqERETTE! |
TAURLATAsA |
If the morbidity is caused by desaturation, the patient should be saturated
reasonably with meat of wild animals and old Sali rice.
If due to roughening, there be insomnia and distress due to vitiation of vayu,
the patient should be managed with vata-alleviating measures such as unction
and sudation.
Oil should be cooked with piluparni, Payasya, rasni, goksura, vaca, sarala,
aguru and patha. It should be taken in dose of 86 or 160 gm. added with honey.
One suffering from trustambha should take mustard oil cooked with kustha,
Srivesjaka, udicya, sarala, devadiru, niyakegara, ajagandha and agvagandha and
added with honey in proper dose.
Rock salt 80 gms., Sunthi 200 gm., pippalimala and citraku 80 gm, each,
bhallataka nuts 20 in number, sour gruel 5.12 litres—with these oil 640 gm. should
be cooked. It gives fertility and alleviates sciatica, trustambha, and piles,
and all disorders of vata.
Oil 640 gm. cooked with equal quantity of curd and eight times sour gruel along
with 80 gm. pippalimula and sunthi alleviates sciatica and arustambha { 39-47 ]
( Thus Astakatvara taila Ny
weanaacafteqeeatney Raa 11 vo 1
TAT: aauot raearared 5707 Fanfare | aeitmaferat ye aaa Fs AAT II BC HI
qwrt aaah: gatgrarad sag aalsenaneaa yore TH | BS 1
» distress
faerie ar qatam = 2aqreo: | aitrertarettaatrardgahiag, il 40 1
meget gatgeeaty sBaaq | edizadtgcaretieanta afaart 4 i
aalifaqaratearantiad: | cagandeatt saat = AAA GR I
fad 3 etd qasea fad eqq son | are: aed ot amaeqsqorayaet 11 43 tt
fearnqaaaieafen: agen: | raed area aaa 4s
eh et. fed geet acai aitrrganereldoatzrgTa Ry tl 4s U1


[PAGE 6]

CARAKA-SAMHITA (CH.
afierarcat a adaraca aati sea qafteatsequeasatrarem: i 4% 11
RAI TEA sara aqa AAG | easranratg wet wae: faRarerat tl 49 1
sarcag afrettat aa sitaset fata cee frre aiid feat ga: gas ue
aa fageaser wR mages aaq |
Thus internal medicine for Grustambha has been said. Now listen about
the external remedy for diminishing kapha.
Earth from the anthill; root, fruit and bark of karafija and brick—powder of
these should be used frequently for anointing.
In trustambha, thick anointing should be done with roots of aSwagandhi
or devadaru mixed with honey, mustard and cath from ant-hill or with danti,
dravanti, surasa and mustard,
Sprinkling is done on the part with hot water decoction with leaves, and
fruits of tarkari, Sigru, surasa viéva, kutaja and nimba.
Mustard pounded and dipped in cow’s urine for the whole night should be
used as anointment.
Kujaja, surasa, kusjha, aromatic drugs, tumburu, gigru, himsra,arka root, earth
from ant-hill and kutheraka mixed with curd and rock salt are used as anointment.
Syonaka, khadira, bilva, brhati, kantakari, sarala, asana, Sobhaiijana, tarkari,
surasa, goksura, arjaka, agnimantha and karaiija—should be boiled in water and
with this decoction the part should be sprinkled over, Or they should be pounded
with urine and used as anointment on the part. This alleviates Grustambha,
One should engage the patient in practicable physical exercise in order
to diminish kapha. For instance, he should be advised to cross over the lands, gravels
and sands in early morning; to swim against the current or an auspicious river
having cold-water or clean cold lake with stable water time and again. Thus on
kapha being dried up Urustambha gets pacified, [ 48-58 ]
sae: AIOE ey RATA wy TRAIT 1 4k
aa aa wag ariaeereneT Ras | ak aaafa a aia cexat feat 1) 0 UI
All the treatment which diminishes kapha but does not aggravate vayu
should be applied always in trustambha at the same time safeguarding the body,
strength and agni. [ 59-60 ]
A AE —
Re srafseia sabitercamreony | feed ast drmecrsafahaeae tl et


[PAGE 7]

XXVIII] CHIKITSASTHANAM
Now the summing up verse—
Etiology, prodroma,symptoms, reasons for unsuitability of (evacuative) measures
and two types of remecies—all this has been said under the treatment of Orus-
tambha. [ 61 ]
safiaet ah acaafrdesasmat ccaseg ha fafecaeat
sreasafatntad aa eafaetseart: | 29 tl
Thus ends the twenty seventh chapter on treatment of Urustambha in the
treatise composed by Agnivesa, redacted by Caraka and _recons-
tructed by Drdhabala as it was not available. [ 27 ]
aeifaatiseara:
CHAPTER XXVIII
aaa tacanfafatatad sareream i it
Now (I) shall expound the chapter on treatment of vatavyadhi. [ 1 ]
fet @ Sarre TATA: 11
As propounded by Lord Atreya. [ 2]
aargad agaiquian wditory! aafeafig ad agatqer sifta: 13
Vayu is life, strength and sustainer of creatures. Vayu is the entire world,
it is the master (of all). [ 3 ]
someanfeien caren: seat faa: | ara: eareatsfirat sttaefiadtr: eat sey tt 2 i
The person whose vayu is with unimpeded movements and in normal state
lives lonz for hundred years devoid of disorders. [ 4 ]
SMARTER: SF Gat Be ara @eae, EaeqeTTAATT II 4 II
wari seq quicavsfrercattar | taaaarqarearanen’ et awl ei
Sq Ge eat avat: Hs ag ai aesaie: aadisitasaot® wt wo 1
eaaaraegaratfar etaifa aafatee: | rae qedea: aartsfrreng: tl <1
Résawtfs ada sae Miaafafory| amaroaahiaaiaier aati e1
aroit afta, aanqe dent gel aan gaqaTeta gl fo 1
aaeamatat @ ger earafeaarr @ i ered gaa Rat aca Acar 1 We
That ( vayu ) is of five types—prana, udana, samana, vyana and apana. It
coordinates the body well while moving unimpededly in ( different ) places,


[PAGE 8]

462 CARAKA-SAMHITA. [ CH.
Prana is located in head, chest, throat, tongue, mouth and nose, Its funct-
ions-are spitting, sneezing, belching, respiration, digestion etc.
Udana is located in navel, chest and throat. Speech, effort, energy, strength,
complexion etc. are its functions.
Samana vayu located in channels carrying sweat, dosas and water ( fluid }
and seated beside the digestive fire provides strength to Agni.
Vyana vayu being quick-moving pervades the entire body and performs the
functions of movements, extension, contraction, blinking etc,
Testicles, urinary bladder and penis, navel, thighs, groins, anus—these are the
seats of apana vayu. It releases semen, urine, faeces, menses and foetus while
situated in intestines.
They all in equilibrium and located in their places perform their ( normal )
functions by which the body is sustained free from disorders, [5-11]
faariem eat ar a: eqearamda |
agarcafagenat asi f& sara: | aahtfataiarn tm: aa frafiran u ea
aESTA walt: atqmasgy | Red arated earargrerarssaaa, lle 1
If they move on wrong path or’ are unbalanced they afflict the body with
disorders relating to their location and functions and take away life shortly.
Although the disorders caused by vataare innumerable the important ones such as
nail-cracking etc, cighty in number have been mentioned in Satrasthana. (Ch, 20).
Now they are being said in other words taking vayu as a whole according to
locations and covering with etiology and treatment, listen, [ 12-14]
sautarersarerarafeasme: | foargvarcrer arvaReaafe 1 Us. 11
Serararereer aaa: | argat Serarfararentectefeertora | te
Berane shaftaeaarzaral | Sereterreorgrara irate Rou
aatarnrastgeastnararrtarta | 38 eal feofa qehrearsfaat gates
dite fattary candi, aalterge rar |
Due to rough, cold, little and light food, excessive coitus and vigils, faulty
therapeutic management, excessive elimination of impurity and blood, excessive
movements such as leaping, jumping, wayfaring and physical exercise, wasting of
dhatus, excessive emaciation due toanxiety, grief and illness, uncomfortable bed and
seat ( chair ), anger, day-sleep, fear, suppression of urges, amadoga, injury, fasting,
injury in vital parts, falling down from elephants, horses and other fast vehicles vayu
Sets aggravated and filling up the vacant channels in the body produces various
disorders pertaining to the entire body or one of the parts, [ 15-18 ]


[PAGE 9]

XXVIII) CHIKITSASTHANAM 463
werd wat at qaeatite z Baa UI
ared g aRTHAUT Sg TA: |
The unmanifested symptoms of these disorders are known as ptrvarlpa
( prodromal symptoms ). When the same are manifested they represent the own
entity of disorders while their lightness (lessened severity ) denotes the subsidence
of the disorder. [ 19 }
aga: wae cat Ratseat eaorrafi i Re tl
Bact sama ufngehrtre | aesraergenct  atasmrrafear ll Rt Ul
Maa eee aTTEAaT | fetarenfasgat Aaa EosTT | RRA
Raettahicad Meare ca al cdrat salir wef afeatshrs: RR
Raeaafaars waainfaarad |
Contractures, stiffness in joints, tearing in bones and joints, horripilation,
delirium, stiffness in hands, back and head, limping, crippledness, humpedness,
drying of organs, sleeplessness, destruction of foetus, sperms and ovum, pulsation,
numbness in organs, crookedness of head, nose, eyes, clavicular region and neck,
tearing, piercing pain, distress, convulsion, mental confusion and exhaustion—these
symptoms are produced by the vitiated vayu. [ 20-23 ]
Ta Stenhaa ge Faat qarTa Be I ‘
AAT aT bas. prips a ae ere RG
agar: wttaer eqerdiarer aeag | mat Porararat AsreMTTTETATAT AR
agrefraaegetinart = gafead | geafranataceraottarttaferar It 29 1
aren varereT ret eat Tea | THIER TRS ATE HAA aT Mt Re Ul
epuagtivanad fraaaag | atafRatgarrd - gatcqueditem 1 2 11
AA RHTA FAL SIM BOM aIgag | east Tera sy Tas erAfSAs HAS Ut Roll
aaedian adara dant sarensefe: \ ars arefit eer SATAATTETTASHAG AL Ut
So qaasad qeqted aml qenafranead ataaaaastae i 3 ut
sRearant aaa aiarsea: | wear: daca ea a Henfeaaleashrs Ua
pie ge rl eli atl fafa saterf grea: afiatsfaa: i ae tt
mena aig seat @ | watqnrecaiar gale ergaatshrs: Ut 24 Ul
mete agar geste ext car | qareroat weet at ferer ara freer 8G Ut
araqorefererat: site: eafrarrats Fas | rerrcoregsrrat: aafeear aaq il 39 11
( egal carne arateerta a |)
Due to peculiarity of catise and location, vayu produces paculiar disorders.
When vayu located in bowels is vitiated; it causes retention of uriné-and stool,
Bradhna’( hernia’), cardiac disorders, gulma, piles and pain in sides,


[PAGE 10]

CARAKA-SAMHITA
(CH.
If vata is vitiated generally all over the body there are quivering and breaking
pain in limbs and joints which are painful as if cracking.
When vitiated vata is located in anus there are retention of stool, urine and
flatus, colic, tympanitis, calculus, gravels, pain and emaciation in shanks, thighs,
sacral region, feet and back.
If vayu is located i aéaya there are pain in heart, navel, sides and abdomen,
thirst, belching, visticika, cough,drying of throat and mouth and dyspnoca. [ 27 ]
When vayu is located in pakvagaya, it causes gurgling sound in intestines,
colic, meteorism, difficulty in passing urine and stool, hardness in bowels and pain
in sacral region.
The vitiated vayu located in sense organs such as ear etc, causes loss of
sensation.
When vayu is located in twak (skin ) the skin is rough, cracked, benumbed, thin,
and is associated with piercing pain, stretching, redness and pain in joints.
If vayu is located in rakta it causes severe pain with heat, abnormal complexion,
Jeanness, anorexia, pimples on body parts and stillness of ingested meal.
In case of vayu having been located in mamsa and medas, body has heavii
in organs, severe picrcing pain as if beaten with sticks or fists, distress and excessive
exhaustion.
If vayu is vitiated in majja and asthi (bone and marrow ), there are breaking
pain in bones and joints, pain in joints, loss of flesh and strength, sleeplessness and
continuous pain,
The vitiated vayu, if located in Sukra, prematurely: expels or retains semen
or foetus and also causes abnormality,
Vayu located in snayu, produces opisthotonus, emprosthotonus, cramps, hump-
edness and other generalized or localised disorders.
If vayu is located in sira, the body having mild pain and swelling dries up
and quivers with siras ( blood vessels ) as motionless, constricted or dilated,
If vayu is located in joint, there occurs swelling like air-filled bladder in touch
and pain during contraction and extension of limbs, [ 24-37 ]
( Thus characters of yayu according to location are said ),
afrge: adterdta: ara: saat i agi agtedtearearg’ arg aay at ai
afar datarad get faa eh a | aRtaahy maraamretreqETat 1 38, 11


[PAGE 11]

XXVIII CHIKITSASTHANAM 465
wat aaeaet atad amelie: | eased Ash wave: aagqar Pred ue i
grt fret aqhea aa ase arr are | eaeraia ata aaoit fire eax: eth
uqeifaageagaases | th aarqead ar Ras earaahhary ea
When vayu aggravated severely affects one half of the body, it dries up the
blood, hand, leg and knee and produces contracture in that half, Consequently
face and also nose, cyebrows, forchead, eyes and jaws get crooked. Thus the
morsel of foo. socs in mouth in the crooked way, the nose is crooked, eyes stiffened
and sacezing, is suppressed in spite of impulse. Tongue when raised becomes
curved ©. hwcames feeble and impeded, tecth become loose, hearing, is deficient
and worse, There is pain in foot, hand, eye, shank, thigh, temple, ear and
check. The disease is localised eithet in one-half of the body or in half of the face.
This is Knows as Sardita® (lacial paralysis ). [ 38-42 ]
wea Afar atseatat area erat | mead at Halgeacvarmefaa, | 23
Seater Aa FEA a EO Ba | peatal Pat wre gv: fertae: 1 ve tl
War aqaRaTrATANA | ( gepRETATATAT
When vayu yzets lodged in both the carotid regions and reaches inside, it causes
‘manyastambha’ (stiffness of carotid regions). Now the disorder known as
‘autaraiyama’ ( emprosthotonus ) will be said.
Neck bends inwards and carotid regions too get stiffened excessively. Besides,
there are gnashing of teeth, salivation, inward bending. of back, stiffness of head,
yawning and lock jaw. This is the feature of emprosthotonus.
Thus emprosthotonus is said. [ 43-44 ]
afecrara g=a4 11 2 11)
qereathaat are: tara fact zat | arg: gateaeand afer 1 ve
aTaeaaaey goat ated fine: | se sears vet zazat Mtarsaaae Ul Bo 1
ated Zar Feat Sra area: | wa faeecte Seed ar sacaler tl ee Ul
Now opisthotonus will be said,
The aggravated yayu drying up the external vessels situated in back, and
carotid regions cause ‘dhanustambha’ (archlike stiffness ) known as ‘bahirayama’
( opisthotonus ). The body of the patient is bent downwards like bow, head goes
to back, chest gets thrown upwards, carotid regions get stiffened and neck is bent
downwards, There are also gnashing of teeth, yawning, salivation, and loss of speech
when it comes with force it kills the patient or produces restlessness. [ 45-48 ]
eas Rat ara deri oat Agareqaqnaay pala davawA II 8°. II
eget a dey ed saan!
30 IT


[PAGE 12]

CAKAKA-SAMHITA (CH.
When vayu is located at the root of the jaw, it causes the jaws to slip down
from their bonds and consequent opening of mouth or by stiffening the jaws it
causes closing of mouth. This is (known as) ‘hanugraha’ (lock-jaw ) which is
characterized by stiffness and absence of pain. [ 49 ]
qeafeafs sat ararearratstas: 11 40 11
cnforarg a eiaiter fect: wergneect: |
The vitiated vayu causes frequent convulsions in the body while drying up hand
and feet along with blood vessels, ligaments and tendons. This is ( known as )
‘aksepaka’. [ 50 1
aferngfrcgesitent: ear area: 4% 1
TSAR WSR: GSAT: | 3
When vayu stiffens hands, feet, head, back and hip the body becomes stiff
like a stick. This is (known as) ‘dandaka’ (plenosthotonus ) which is incurable. [51]
eaea: eareffardiat qed wasnt 4e 11
ert dteaetetfiaiar, Rrasiiq
In ardita etc. when the paroxysm of the disorder goes away, the patient feels
normal but in case it persists it afflicts him with respective troublesome symptoms.
The physician should not take up these cases. [ 52 ]
adiearsd atta fren: aragfiaiter 1143.11
was aren vet afd anata at | galsterafar fe aot arrereaita 48 II
Ug detente cet at teased | care a Prey cats aazeoTT 44 II
If vayu affects the half of the body and while drying up the blood vessels and
ligaments it paralyses one side, either left or tight, and causes loss of movement,
pain and loss of speech.
When ( vitiated vayu ). causes contracture in one of the feet or hands with
Piercing pain and distress, this is known as ‘ckatigaroga’.
When affection is generalised, it is known as ( sarvatiga roga ). [ 53-55°]
feneqat sfegdtearamered mary! gut easqwmttdene eaegt ge 1 4% I
araaraRnraraitartaatttaar | eet 2 Wangtencqaraateat tl 49 1
Grdhrasi ( sciatica ) starts from hip and gradually comes down to waist, back,
thigh, knee, shank and foot and affects these parts with stiffness, distress and piercing
pain and also frequent quiverings. These symptoms are of vata but when the
disorder is caused by vata and kapha it is associated with drowsiness, heaviness and
anorexia,


[PAGE 13]

XXVIIL} CHIKITSASTHANAM 467
Khalli produces cramps in foot, shank, thigh and wrist.
eaaarargetal fe: dare Fatah!
The remaining disorders may be known from the symptoms according to
location and name. [ 56-57 ]
qaeaag dant Rrarrerseaaa ll 4< Il
arabatgeeet a avteareartia = (an) | rafters 28 aerettetsgefeer M48
arata fe agucaraateraraget: | gfaaedt aaea as aa fener agra &o
qdeasaaniearrenstarraneg |
In all these, association of pitta etc. should also be observed.
Vitiation of vayu takes place from either wasting of dhatus or obstruction in
passage.
Vata, pitta and kapha move in all the channels of the body. Due to
subtleness, vayu itself provokes the other two dogas. When aggravated it excites
them and carrying them to different places produces different disorders due to
obstruction in passage and dries up rasa etc. [ 58-60 ]
fing frags TeeaeMt Aes BATA UI GE
secaccaavitedian Raqre: citerenttret | steatteaeteat ecarerartt shina Il 8 It
aganracatenartiat a eRe | oat aarerfecrentarracat sae 43 tt
waq err sarastrd aosaria a | aster faauiter frsat: sargetat It 88 Il
au fadifearat a dare ca ata | ae: feet ag: sitar sitet sserefererat We 1
cavarara cf da: @ Gest AeAUSSAa: | eTeIAeCATSSTA Tt hea atftrarafa i && Ul
dus’ daft a asifafta gaa! rset faarn careaeaet aftaer |i 9 tt
asa tet a feat sat TAT! garanstaat at Pease age tl Rel
aa gat a waite aeaaazastas | qamafecreart Tet qarsashas 1&0
aaatstafrardisa: <2 eam ofterae | asery act Stat qa Ts AE: | 8
farrq difsanaa gt Ios TET TAA | aoitangig atadtaar area: 1 ot ll
aeed Eat Sa aden aEAshAS |
If vayu is covered by pitta the following symptoms arise—burning sensation,
thirst, pain, giddiness, feeling of darkness, aggravation of burning sensation by the
use of pungent, sour, salty and hot things and desire for cold.
In case of covering with kapha there are coldness, heaviness and pain,
suitability of pungent etc. and particular desire for fasting, exertion, rough and hot
things.
If vayu is covered with rakta, there is burning sensation with disress, the space
between skin and muscle becomes red and swollen and rashes appear,


[PAGE 14]

468 CARAKA-SAMHITA (CH.
Appearance of hard and decoloured boils, swelling, horripilation and feeling
of ant’s crawling—these syrhptoms are found in vayu covered with mamsa.
Vayu covered with medas causes Adhyavata which is characterised by shifting,
unctuous, soft and cold swelling in body parts along with anorexia. This is curable
with difficulty.
In case of vayu having been covered with asthi, the patient likes hot appli-
cations and kneading. Besides, the body has breaking pain, malaise and piercing
pain.
When vayu is covered with majja, there are bending, yawning, cramps and
pain which ease by pressing with hands,
| When yayu is covered with gukra, semen is not expelled or expelled excessively
and it causes sterility.
If vayu is covered with food, there is pain in abdomen on taking food which
subsides on empty stomach.
When vayu is covered with urine, there are retention of urine and blowing up
of urinary bladder.
When vayu is covered with faeces, stool is constipated too much, there is cutting
pain downwards in anorectum, uncting substance gets digested quickly, the patient
suffers from hardness in bowels after meals, due to pressure with food the patient
passes hard stool with difficulty and delay, there is pain in hip, groins and back,
yvayu moves in reverse direction and heart is ill. [ 61-71 ]
aftacaftegeren: gaya gerensfae: |! 9% 11
WAALS HAT: THA Asa | EAA arerataar Tht astrfeaarat 11 92 1
oF eased aediatrara Rereafa at a at | vara, awaaectara, arrafaeazara ilsell
Displacement of joints, lock-jaw, contracture, humpedness, hemiplegia, wasting
of body parts, paraplegia, khudavatata, stiffness and the disorders located in majja
and asthi are curable with difficulty or incurable due to deepness of tkcir location.
They should be treated if they are new, free from complications and in strong
patients. [ 72-74 ]
faa: wt feat arettrraet ora | ad faeqeasmargt Steere |! 4 11
ag afidaraasint aa: eget aavarer cate stata ga: 119% I
qinisargarqaaat edge: laa: gat: arssatteqara: | 99 11
| materiiene: afard Aetaa lear Stedatatsineacarg’: | 9¢ 1
a) | areata: A2aartaqiats | Aare Rawag g aa stoeTATlT aT 1 98 11
aaatafad wet aad | gengreaq| evatqeaatueasamerat: Il co Ut
=—


[PAGE 15]

XXVIII) CHIKITSASTHANAM 469
feawearg mareata ard Toast | Sear araeetaenrt gomrearey swat tl <8
asafaad gfe simianeahradag | raed ge Ae eAaeTITAAA UI <8 II
aa Seat ee a ferafrscrn: |
Now listen about the successful treatment of the disorders of vata.
If vayu is alone and uncovered it should be managed with intake of ghee,
muscle-fat, oil and marrow.
When the patient is tired of the unctiny substance he shoul’ be given some
interval and thereafter again uncted with milk, vegetable, soup of domestic, aquatic
or marshy meat mixed with uncting substance, payasa (rice cooked with milk ),
kySara with sours and salt, unctuous enema, snuffing and saturating food and when
uncted well should be fomented.
The patient having been massaged, well should be subjected to unctuous
fomentation by means of tube, bed and bolus or the means according to need.
Afier inassage and. fomentation even a crooked or stiffened limb can be
bent gradually as desired like a piece of dry wood.
After fomentation horripilation, piercing pain, distress, dilatation, swelling
stiffness, seizures etc. are pacified quickly and softening comes forth.
The use of uncting substance nourishes the dried body tissues quickly
and promotes strength, digestive power, corpulence and vital breath.
One should administer unction and sudation frequently. When the bowels
are softened with unction, the disorders of vata do not stay further, [ 75-82 ]
qata aatreary wae a mereafa tl <8
agit: Sedqeeated fastata | at ferafes at areenferata at il cet
qadcosts at fetgtat frag | faeaeseamtenracrethe vehi i cs tl
att aqaistis searaentaageinaa | gaat atsfaten: eared Pretearata lick!
qaadietiat ateteatior| dgaentaa ant Seettt gafédt ui con
aaraaanferdcent: aad gal ararqaaar | aatadtearata il cet
aft araraa: sta atattafaPateeras, |
In case, due to excess of impurity, the disorder does not get pacified, the
patient should be evacuated with mild unctuous purgatives.
‘The patient should take ghrta prepared with tilvaka’or satala or castor oil with
milk—this climinates impurity and is wholesome.
Excrement accumulated due to food being fatty, sour, salty, hot etc. checks
vayu by creating obstruction in channels, hence one should carminate vayu.


[PAGE 16]

CARAKA-SAMHITA [ CH.
If the patient is weak and unfit for purgation, he should be managed with
non-unctuous enema and digestive or appetiser drugs and food mixed with them.
After evacuation and kindling of digestive fire, unction and fomentation
should be administered again. Frequent use of sweet, sour and salty diet, snuffing
and smoking should be made in all such cases,
Thus is said the general treatment of vatika disorders, [ 83-88 ]
fartirreg teed Ta are frAa ce 1
manthagdeasat Tas Ter. 7 aatgrrdafira Il 0 11
ares Tae ange: fea: | aateafaassast wee: eee Wes "
eek rsh exenfere after: ater cael PR cette 1&2
Reet ateiece fear amit al mmrearren: eAthena se 1 I
Reearahintaet facarrareti: | qeamt Ts SATE IATA 1 So I
ae presents anaes ret ord shecaferer 1 Ren
aaa crit ant: aad eradies: |
Particularly in vata located in belly, the patient should take alkali and sour
things mixed with digestives and appetisers and thus help maturation of impurities.
In vata located in anorectum
and colon, the measure relieving udavarta
( upward movement of vayu ) is useful.
If vata is located in amasaya ( stomach ), measures should he adopted after
evacuation.
If vayu is vitiated generally all over the body, massage, non-unctuous and un-
ctuous enema should be applied.
In vata located in twak, sudation, massage, bath and delicious food are
useful.
In vata located in rakta, cold applications,
purgation and blood-letting
are beneficial.
In vata located in mamsa and medas, non-unctuous enema and pacificatory
measures are applied.
One should overcome the vata !
‘ocated in asthi and maj ja by applying unction
externally as well as internally.


[PAGE 17]

XXVUL) CHIKITSASTHANAM 471
In vata located in gukra, intensive exhilaration and food promoting strength
and semen are beneficial. If there be some obstruction in seminal passage one
should administer purgative and when patient has taken diet thereafter he should
apply the above measures.
Tf foetus is dried or the child is reducing due to vata, milk processed with sugar,
kagmarya and madhuka is beneficial for elevation.
If vata is vitiated in heart, milk boiled with salaparni is beneficial.
In vata located in umbilical region, fishes cooked with tender bilva fruits
should be given.
If there is twisting in body due to vata, poultices ( with vata-alleviating:
drugs ) are useful.
In case of contracture, oil cooked with black gram and rock salt should Ix
massaged.
In case of vata located in arms and head, snuffing and post-meal intake of
ghee are beneficial.
If vayu is located below the navel, enema as well as snuffing with pressed
juice is useful. [ 89-98 ]
affa aad aft ae adeaa aes
arstettarrevancarqathatian | aed aed varnt fata tt too Il
aeacrnrseen facaed a! aaetg caste agal TeottrateTy | Lok Il
aaa: setae: ved Segentak: | caret eg feaarrgerat citer a Nh (oR MI
safirivat atarea Rragstarad fear | aed | aatcearl eed feast Panag Ml G02
In facial paralysis snuffing, head oil, saturation, tubular fomentation anc
poultices with meat of marshy animals are beneficial.
In hemiplegia, sudation combined with unction and purgation are useful.
Venesection in tendocalcaneum and ankle and cauterization are applied in sciatica.
In khalli ( cramps ) hot poultices with payasa ( rice cooked with milk ), kpSara
(rice cooked with pulse ) or meat mixed with oil and ghee are commended.
In lock-jaw where mouth is open the jaw having been fomented should be
pressed with thumbs and raised with index fingers and elevation of chin is recomme-
nended. ;
If jaw is displaced it should be brought to its place. If it is stiffened it should
be bent after it is fomented. [ 99-103 ]
saa carrzeanfafraraterarata |


[PAGE 18]

472 CARAKA-SAMHITA [ CH.
In every disorder particular step should be taken according to location,
dusya ete.
afietsIaRAAVIPATTg: Loe Il
farae ea fend a eal sraconfa @ | car: gaia atearfa earesamfl a Neo
seat ae ag aa aed arto |
Ghee, oil, fat and marrow used as intake, massage and enema, unctuous
fomentations, wind-free place, wrappers, meat soups, mild, sweet, sour and salty
edibles and_whatever is bulk-promoting is useful for the patients of vatika disor-
ders. [ 104-105 ]
AGM WALSH UTS AT TH I LOR Il
amataizgarqaaterstatea: Tae | arate cart ferarqeaesatrdenars lool
ae eer Tem | catararear fant: eimai 1 BR I
Watege: ane: quiaseateate | witerawetadter eq |! (0% 11
arnt wert Sarenhrsarony | aadtgnatarts zens waa | eho Ut
seers aqeraitasarat war aay |
3 ae peat Prasat eRe il
ardtead sagatia frBenreqameny |
Sar fas ad Aereag gaia a1) R311
get fred fron ee gue sav aan! ahreteaqiat: Res exrgoaea 11 222 1
sentftartaaadtcarafastaa: | acusdisnityraratateaanteta | eee 1
eae: aes amafisca aad fag acosqeaaiiarzalt et Praag eG
aieera an fara gaatdtonfean | qagrit fared anifier asta: 1 eee 1
wort asattamaiie gutasr | stequaeia aPlaiaetit il (29 1
wae: Stale aeaq Seas |
The patient of vatika disorder should be fed with fatty meat soups prepared
with goat’s head and meat of aquatic, marshy and carnivorous animals separately
in decoction of bala, paficamala or dafamula and added with sour curd and trikatu
and having perceptible salt.
Poultices should be made with these very meats freed from bones, pounded
and mixed with ghee, oil and sour things,
Tubs filled with decoctions of ( vata-alleviating ) leaves, milk and oil should
be used for bath.
Sprinklings should also be used in patients of vatika disorders after they are
well-massaged.


[PAGE 19]

XXVIIL)} CHIKITSASTHANAM. 473,
Meat of marshy and aquatic animals, dagamila, Satavari, kulattha, badara,
black gram, sesamum, rasna, barley and bala should be boiled with fat, sour curd and
sour gruel in an earthen pitcher. With this tube fomentation should be applied.
The paste of these drugs should be used as poultice and ghee and oil cooked with
the same should be used for massage and intake.
Musta, yeast, sesamum, kustha, devadaru, salt, nata ( tagara ) processed with
curd, milk and four fats should be used as poultice.
Utkarika, vesavara ( dietary preparations ) milk, black gram, sesamum, boiled
rice, castor seeds, wheat, barley, jujube, laghu pajicamtla— all mixed with uncting
substance should be pasted thickly on the painful part and bandaged with castor
leaves in the night. In the next morning the bandage should be removed and the
part should be sprinkled with milk mixed with water and again covered with the
poultice and bandaged with haired leather. This bandage should be removed
in night.
Pastes and poultices should be made of oily seeds pounded with sours and well-
cooled and also of vata-alleviating aromatic. substances, rice cooked with milk
and rice cooked with pulse added with uncting substance. [ 106-117 ]
wagartraratarra: Start raeMe || R¢ Ul
fafrara fabracathrrraraatoAs | Pasta: TAM WSIS Wagan
qanagecarai att sedfaa: ae | Tee 2& fadsiiadta: ame Nl Ro
aa asrareragrarageney le | watt: afte: sea: fem: RawarIgT | GRR
freer: seiteen: rarerarateag | aaa ard creat dont faoaest Teta | RRR
fagr Faure afiatatirat a1 aatfaeazt Be gqaavd faaratq tt &22 Ul
aaa afer: BAT aT eT qarastas | aratqdtqarat ¢ freasediia Gases I 22 I
aes Was TIT gt Ta! slaedersremtanrarcientancgie: 1) 224 1
arasistadtiar centaattcanttresy | afers arrareaeretat arargarerarg, tl 2RG Ul
facreaieantaed Taz BETA | 3 eg: seftorrstt ahtorggatsrared 3 11 229 Ul
aggfent Saad eaqaatang | daha Fat AMARTRAT THA Ul RRS Il
geaat fahratsta AETUAG Were | TET SARA FSUSSARAT, |! ERB It
BeoraTaTTS Ta: gaa Tas Waa | crarfarranet & ears Talay, Ul P20 Ul
waatt Taq gt sedtrad Tay! FCAT ASA AC HTTT HA |! BAK Mt
Qaateaqaeae ad sat BIA! aatd a Tala siactaretia TN GAR It
eee wea merete aeatd Paraaa,| fercsnteaTt ara aatqareating | 223
qqateaag awe saa | Pave AoTAt alert <ate aa: I 838 Ul
ha fagad Ad arigurfaartag | fet qqarrattat a TAaTeTaATCOTT Ut RR I
ailattagecarat ca fat a wag!


[PAGE 20]

474 CARAKA-SAMHITA CH.
Further I will describe various nectar-like uncting formulations for pacifying
various disorders in patients suffering from roughness and pure vayu,
In water 10,24 litres daSamila 160. gm. and yava, kola and kulattha 640 gm.
should be boiled till reduced to one-fourth, with this decoction and paste of vitaliser
drugs along with Sarkara, kharjara, kagmarya, driksa, badara and phalgu and milk,
ghee 640 gm, should be cooked. This is a successful alleviator of pure vata and free
from complications, This should be used as intake, massage and enema.
Citraka, sunthi, rasna, puskarambla, pippali and fati—with the paste of these
drugs ghee should be prepared. This is an excellent alleviator of vatika disorders,
Scum ( supernatant layer ) of ghee should be cooked in milk boiled with bala
and bilva. This should be used as snuff in the dose of 20 or 40 gm. in vata located
in head.
The bones of domestic, marshy and aquatic animals should be cooked in
water after crushing them. The fat thus extracted should be cooked again with the
decoction of dasamula and paste of jivaka, rsabhaka, asphota, vidarl, vata-alleviating
and vitaliser drugs adding double quantity of milk. Ghee thus prepared and used
as snuff, massage, intake and enema alleviates quickly vata located in blood vessels,
joints, bones and belly. This is like nectar and promoter of strength and corpulence
for those who have deficiency of marrow, semen and ojas.
Similarly the muscle-fat of crocodile, fish, tortoise and porpoise cooked by the
aboye method should be used afresh as snuff and intake
Triphala 640 gm., horse gram 320 gm.. gobhafijana bark and adhaki each 200
gm., rasna 80 gm., citraka 80 gm., dasamila 40 gm.—all these should be boiled in
water 10.24 litres reduced to one-fourth. Then urine, sour gruel, sour curd, dadima
and ypksamla, oil, fat, ghee, marrow, milk and paste of vitaliser drugs 240 gm.
should be added to it and cooked. This mahasneha (great fat ) should be used for
massage in vata located in blood vessels, marrow and bone; generalised and
localised disorders ( of vata ), trembling, convulsions and pain.
Oil cooked with the equal quantity of the juice taken out of root and leaves of
nirgundi is beneficial in sinus, leprosy, vatika disorders and skin diseases like
pama and scrofula used as inake, massage and dressing.
Oil cooked in decoction of karpasa seeds and horse gram also alleviates
vata, [ 118-135 |


[PAGE 21]

XXVIII] CHIKITSASTHANAM. : 415
arena eficat cared ord afin 1 288
aaa ~ seed Praraay | aearaTacrasaTARATAT: | RRO I
fae: of: waTTeTRTE ATTA |
In the juice 2 radish and equal: quantity of milk mixed together curd should
be kept for three days. With 1.92 litres of this sour liquid, oil 640 gm. should be
cooked along with the paste of madhuyasti, Sarkara, rasna, lavana, ardraka and
Sunthi 40 gm. cach. This alleviates vata by use as intake and massage. [ 136-137 ]
wager fro agarfirary ll te Ul
oFea ae cd Treat Famed faaag | qaersaMaagy alarafaercgg | 8 I
age eran saat wed fade: | AAMSHSAAT AIA YRAS RT tt Co It
facqraralcaat aahiaaay | Fa ad warm qos: wafer Ul tat Ml
fae: fat aerarterd: aia setter |
Oil-cake stored for many years should be boiled in decoction of paficamtila.
The extract after {iltcring should be used. in cooking oil 640 gm. with eight times
milk. It alleviates all surts of vatika disorders particularly it is commended in vata
associated with kapha.
Barley, jujube, horse gram, gajapippali, dried radish and bilva each 160 gm.
should be boiled in liquid sours (like sour gruel, buttermilk etc. ). With this
decoction oil should be cooked with the paste of sour fruits (like pomegranates etc. )
and pungents. 1t should be used in cold season by those suffering from severe
vatika disorders. [ 138-141 ]
aaarafanrcint Aerarareat: oT | ez II
aaimayeasatacin =| al cgaratameacaf al teh
fraanfa fasta wagtrecrtn alaaatqear a Fares vai tee
qereneUs TH gat aqdy| faasheasatcrqmiqurqard fie I Ree ll
fata qreitaagrentng atwag | adpeacamed at sat creat Te Ml (ae I
waa crgaea aseqeys aut | doved faaed Adar aalfaarfag ll veo 11
attot a a gata Hare: sae? | ward gears 14 crater | Ue I
wewRUs Tea gamed wal qhrafterghatametsres a: 1h Le UI
wag aaaaisaia: weath: aatiae: | adtacsqdormalaenreag: | Ro Ul
qaatfataaqerrioitetotr: | TCM ReTTETAeT TT: Wren
Tsratareqdatsaarates | erEgMasraeReHS ETT | Ue Il
aegentaqemifrana: | saqnenntapeatetiraghy: i 243 Ul
eterna aaa Leama: fas featerraraanfta 11 4 U1
wanes aa: oot Paha ae settee | caret ered cat feet ote Tenet at are tI


[PAGE 22]

476 CARAKA-SAMHITA
E dearest a arora | presi Ste araoarfafrarera RAI
( aftrara geo genet arferery | )
(CH.
xf aattoa!
Further listen about the other tailas ( oily preparations ) useful in all vatika
disorders in all the four forms (intake, massage, snuff and enema) and which
promote life span, strength and complexion, destroy the disorders of rajas and Sukra
(female and male reproductive factors) and thus provide fertility. They are
harmless, effcctive and alleviator of all dogas.
Oil 2.56 kg. should be cooked with the juice of sahacara 4 kg., paste of its
root 400 gm. and four.times milk. When it is prepared, the powder of Sarkara
720 gm. should be dissolved in it. ‘This oil should be used in severe vatika disorders,
Juice of swadamstra ( goksura ) 1.28 litres, equal quantity of milk, Sunthi
240 gms,, jaggery 320 gm. with these oil 640 gm. should be cooked. It is useful in
all vatika disorders. When the drug ( oil ) is digested, gruel with milk should be
taken as diet.
Oil 2.56 kg. should be cooked with the decoction of bala 4 kg., gudtici 1 kg.
and rasna 500 gm. made in water 2.56 litres and reduced to one-tenth added with
curdwater, sugarcane juice and Sukta ( vinegar ) each in quantity equal to that of
cil ( 2.56 litres ), goat’s milk in half quantity (1.28 litres ) and paste of the follo
wing drugs each 40 gms.—kati, devadaru, ela, mafijistha, aguru, candana, padmaka,
ativisa, musta, Sdrpaparni, harepu, madhuyasti, surasa, vyaghranakha, rsabhaka,
jivaka, exudation of palasa, kastiri, nalika, jatikoga, kutnkuma, Saileya, jatiphala, katu-
phala, hribera, twak, kunduru, karpira, turuska, Srinivasa, lavaiga, nakha, kakkola,
kustha, mamsi, priyahgu sthaupeya, tagara, dhyama, vaca, tender leaves of madana
and nayakeSara. When on is propaed it !should be brought down and added
with the paste of arematic leaves and thereafter filtered. It should be used
according to-prescribed method. This *balataila’ alleviates dyspnoea, cough, fever,
hiccup, vomiting, guima, wastmg, due io (chest ) wound, splenomegaly, consump-
tion, epilepsy and inawsprcivasness and 1s an excellent alleviator of vata-vyadhi.
{ This 1s delivered by the xeapher Kygpatreya to Agniveda ). [ 142-156 ]
( Thus Balataila ).
| SATURTST at Roroaweaat TT | C9 |
maat quit aeer Bae qa! caraidiaataitcantaresasge tt ee Ul
Ssitagt | aeatsialtenratataraoarasraeat 8, Ul
qararatrstardirarctatiasagtn | caretinatigrntctrereeate tl Geo Ul


[PAGE 23]

XXVIII) CHIKITSASTHANAM 477
qareinege CoS TCT RTHTETTE! | ame haqerrrneTtaTATSe UI EE Il
atamgrerntermat — wfee: | afaoraerntt wgeersa avi eR Ul
aeheaq aodiatfaasdaeaae: | sarerearrenttrder weft AIT RU
aracarttred Sop Resreererserecany, | ( wearer err ane Sera Cee M)
qeqaaraaar |
Gudiici 20 kg. should be boiled jn water 81.92 litres reduced to one-fourth.
With this, oil 5.12 kg, should be cooked with equal quantity of milk aad the paste
of ela, mamsi, tagara, udira, siriva, kustha, candana, bala, tamalaki, meda, Satap-
uspa, rddhi, jivaka, kakoli, ksirakakoli, sravapi, atibala, nakha, mahasravani,
jivanu, vidari, kapikacchu, Satavari, mahimeda, karkatakhya, harenu, vaca, goksura,
eranda, rasna, kala, sahacara, vira, fallaki, musta, twak, patra, rsabhaka, saha, ela,
kunkuma, sprkka, lavaiga 10 gm. each, maiijistha 30 gm. and madhuka 320 gm.
This oil known as ‘Ampta taila’ is one of the best oils, It brings back to normalcy
the persons with dimini hed energy, agni and strength and confused mind and
suffering from insanity, restlessness and. epilepsy. It is an excellent alleviator of
vatika disorders.
(This is delivered by the teacher Krsnatreya and is honoured by physi-
cians. [ 157-164 ]
(Thus Amrta taila ).
rraracaiage Asst faaaaq waknad: fediarianfaatfaaa tl ce
qeitsamanraat rearcoat aataa | erameneatteal earetat wee Tag Mt LEG II
afar creraa |
Oil 10.24 kg. should be cooked in decoction of rasna 40 kg. with paste of
aromatic drugs growing in himalayas and drugs of the ¢ladi group ( mentioned
under amrta taila ), It alleviates vatika disorders, ‘
Such preparations may also be prepared with atwagandha, prasdrigi and two
types of bala ( bala and atibala ). In these cases, separate oils may: be prepared with
paste of bala etc. along with milk, [ 155-166 ]
( ‘Thus Rasna tail )
qaread dé ad qerenfand | Tel Fat qetatfarrraedt: it Ko"
freqeafafararcrarararrehnae: | agrsaarepadprfepanat t1 {<I
qoacrerretfererarearerragrate: | afters taneqar, afta arareraet mart tl C8 tl
af qpard aoa!
arq@ageata fanaa wats a | fara aparrare art Aarer Tae It We Ul
weit agar at TaTSARA Tar | artnet a MA AaTTNTTTTT NRK Ut
bil \


[PAGE 24]

478 CARAKA-SAMHITA { CH.
aaluine of “racial milk, oil, sour curd and sour gruel all in equal quantity
should be cooked together with the paste of bala, citraka, rock salt, pippali, ativisa,
rasna, cavika, aguru, Sigru, bhallataka, vaca, kustha, goksura, Supthi, puskaramila,
fati, bilva, Satahva, tagara and devadaru. This oil taken destroys even very severe
vatika disorders.
(‘Thus Malakadya taila ).
Oil 2.56 kg. should’be cooked with decoction of vasa root and gudici 8.kg.
(each 4 kg. ), citraka and asvagandha 4 kg. ( each 2 kg.) along with milk. This
oil should be used in patients broken and shattered by ( disorders of ) vata. If added
with the drugs of above mentioned eladi group, it becomes more effective, [167-171]
( Thus Vysamuladi taila ).
crafatrreareartacacrzar Il (92 Il
CAARTSMTHST MaRS | Tat ATS ATL BAUGH TAT | 493 11
aaeta sata adaeiar wife: | QeaarsATAqehaTa: sy: | ASE II
gag aeatine: ard Fond fears senamearanramercrg7 I 49 Il
aera |
aft qaaaea|
waITEsearat areata frnfreadt: | c8a qearat a ae afrwititaaa tl {9k I
arate faqareg aaaraaen, | syreae fire dekh aaa ll (99 I
aaraarrqeraTat qraa a | dtenseqaaaai fe aecatsha aaaq gag | {9¢ I
qa gtasat Renqataqaeag | Remamere fet eqarattrag tl t9% I
aveerra ata ante areatt ora sf a lana atftearerd fafa sata | ¢co 1
atfea 3 agra ve fafaaied areaqed | qaqERataaengs ITH, Ul (eR It
maaiacteaeareaaaitsa Gea: | fers Ranat aa aerantfeaat Tas Ree Il
Rasni, sirisa, madhuyasti, Sunthi, sahacara, gudici, Syonaka, devadaru, aragvdha,
a§vagandha, goksura each 400 gm. should be made into decoction. With this oil
540 gm. should be cooked with the paste of sarvagandha ( group of aromatic drugs )
each 10 gm. along with curd; sour gruel, sour liquid of horse gram, radish juice
and sugar cane juice each 640 ml. This known as ‘Milaka taila’ ( oil prepared
with roots ) alleviates spleen enlargement, retention of urine, dyspnoea, cough and
vatika disorders and promotes complexion, life span and strength.
( Thus Malaka taila ).
Physician should administer oil prepared with the decoction of barley, jujube,
horse gram, fishes, Sigru, bilva and juice of radish along with curd and milk to
alleviate all yatika disorders,


[PAGE 25]

XXVIII ) CHIKITSASTHANAM 479
Oil prepared in juice of garlic with the above drugs alleviates vata.
These oils may also be administered to women having bathed after periods.
Taking one of these even a sterile women delivers a son,
‘The agurvadya taila mentioned under cold fever if cooked several hundred
times alleviates vatika disorders.
One desirous of success should use ine ous tobe said under vatarakta for
pacification of vata.
There is no remedy for vatika disorders better than oil due to presence of
vyavayl, ugna, guru and snigdha properties. It becomes more effective after
processing. Hence having been cooked with the drugs of vata-alleviating groups
hundred or thousand times it destroys the disorders located even in minute channels
quickly. [ 172-182 ]
feat araroft aal eae, ale eat | ara fererrfePe: aitevearaag Paatea i 823
fireraat faction aftenqent aan finan, | exert aaa afisitata + Wea Il <2 I
wanted vat aifsaten: eftereaa: | fate atten a caStasPrag Ml Xs UI
agafastegaiitas Gang | wayne eatar  aitearftor nice tt
antaa Taran srrat aTaheor: | eaqretet Frere aaa afataay Il 229 I
ait after Sot Rroerdast fray | Paw menftrerreat Preraret Pafesaa Ut Cee Ut
In case of combination of vayu with pitta etc. particularly in covering of
channels over all general treatment should be given
In vata covered with pitta cold and hot measures should beapplied alternately.
Jivaniya ghrta is also commended in such case: Besides, meat: of wild animals,
barley, Sali rice, sustainer milk enemas, purgation, intake of milk boiled with
paficamila and bala are useful, the patient should be sprinkled with madhuyasti taila,
balataila, ghee, milk, decoction of paficamiila or cold water:
In vata covered with kapha barley food, wild animals and birds, sudation,
strong non-unctuous enema, emesis, purgation, old ghee and oil of sesamum and
mustard are wholesome.
In case there is combination with both kapha and pitta, - pitta should be over-
come first. [ 183-188 ]
TTT AeA RH TATA W Nee Ut
gerard Rei gy PS aaa ar | AA fheatlges ert aT THTTt FEAT tt Ro Il
fad at aeting aatredt. Rfrete erased ateaatdtrat: ut Ut
fren: Predad Meta eivegd | rgteafeter tecrgaatg 1 Wz I


[PAGE 26]

480 CARAKA-SAMHITA {CH.
faint g anh qaaeatt wreae | 8 fra eH a: engesitatsgMstrs: it 62311
ait: cara frat aa arat Sasaraat | atfeaagza satarcatinast fray 1 ke 1
saearanaetarad = saitsta | eaaeagradicaar afast fear 1 e841
neraaisRaasea Wagaatssad | wart agese: ad dig wy tee II
quanta g ato ean ahacaeaa: | Tear AwAces feardigeadafewa tl (29 1
eqearredt at Fe: ares eatteastag | aaaal fatdat afeatie: awa art £2<
( xeqearaa art frarfairtaraas | )
When kapha is obServed to have come in the stomach, emesis should he given.
When kapha comes in pakvaSaya ( intestines ) or pitta spreads allover the body
purgation should be administered.
When kapha liquified by fomentation is situated in pakvasaya or there appears
the symptoms of pitta-both of these should be eliminated with enema.
Vata followed by kapha should be elimirated with hot non-unctuous enemas
containing cow’s urine. Likewise, that combined with pitta should be eliminated
with non-unctuous enemas containing milk. The patient should also be given
unctuous enema with oil prepared with sweet drugs.
When vata is associated with kapha and located in head, one should advise
smoking and snuffing etc.
After elimination of pitta and kapha if vata still remains moving in respiratory
passages, the treatment of single vata should be given there,
If vata is covered with blood, measures prescribed for vatarakta should be
applied, In amavata, one should apply the measures alleviating prameha, vata
and medas.
In vata covered with mamsa, fomentation, massage, meat soup, milk and
uncting substances are beneficial.
In vata located in bone and marrow mahasneha should be administered.
In vata covered with semen, the measure mentioned earlier should be
applied.
In vata covered with food, the food should be vomited and digestive and
appetising drugs should be administered along with light dict.
In vatacovered with urine, diuretics, fomentation and urethral douche
should be applied
In vata covered with faeces, castor oil should be given, Besides, unctuous
measures as prescribed for udayarta shoyld be applied.


[PAGE 27]

——— << i i-
XXVIII} CHIKITSASTHANAM 481
Doga situated in its own place is strong, hence it should be overcome first with
its specific remeclial measures such as emesis or purgation or enema or pacifying ones.
Thus is sail properly about covering of vata by pitta etc. [ 189-198 ]
araarat fe qaqrararatearacat aay UI 68 Ul
fag caraemrearonaeaart waset | | srtatt aonreararardt, sat goatee ashe a Ueooll
Aqsa A Ta TATRA | faa tracaraarqerarat IeIT I 298 Il \
ateatal fe warrat ati aa saa | eaezatett ered reat Safer sary Roel |
cata sina Rag a aaa TTA | Based saetewHT Garay tt 403 |!
art ouagt ax Sega fata) sorgt
aan: Tera AAT AATTAT: | marae:
ae stared aa atat afiiftert |
Now sinless! listen to me telling about the symptoms of mutual covering of five
types of vata in brief as well as detail.
Prana covers udana etc. and the latter also cover prana. Similarly all others
udana ctc. cover mutually. Thus there are twenty types of mutual covering
of the five types of vata in stage of aggravation. These should be observed properly.
Vacantness of all senses, diminution of intellect, memory and strength are the
symptoms of vyana covered by prana. Tt should be managed as supraclavicular
disorders.
Excessive sweating, horripilation, skin diseases, numbness in body parts
are the symptoms of prana covered by vyana. Here unctuous purgatives should
be administered.
In case of samana covered by prana, stunning, stammering and dumbuness
are observed. Here uncting substances are used in four ways (intake, massage,
snuffing and enema ) and also sustaining enemas.
When prana is covered by samana disorders of grahani, sides and heart and
pain in stomach are scen. In such cases appetising ghrta ( ghee processed with
appetising drugs ) is given. [ 199-205.]
fate: ofreartt Rrsaretegrecioe: ll 2% It
aarit qeaiearcgat simedga | acateters aa sTdaparert azar Hl 209 MI
suidtasaatat art aegcanfa atl sartarat Tet @ aa aftearfter tt 0c 1
- fagavaraaad get Satoargag | weatgAsTt ober reat Tz MI ROR
saad aa acute ated Sarasa | ARsenshetare HASTUATTTT i Ro
ek wraad wx Sleek afte area | searenTegaratTEMTE AATF UI RN
5)


[PAGE 28]

fad cammgasat a ferdcqataaa | aatiaga eat wafgeqataang | 20% 1
afang hres ad coat ney | Asal araI MaTasHATasMATSAT AT | LA I
Sata saa saa SEs, | ereratseatfrarseagaiarefafeaitsag tl RV I
satiate aa ced fad oy | sardeaaartd ara gata Baw: 1 Vs I
aut eamint afadfeatssact vat lamegé aafqenaqracoreaa tl Xe% II
afagias aerqarat gfrgea |
| 482 CARAKA-SAMHITA (CH.
When udina is covered by prana stiffness inhead, coryza, difficulty in respirat-
ion, cardac disorder and drynesss of mouth are seen. In such case, treatment as in
supraclavicular diseases should be given consoling the patient atthe same time.
In case of prana covered by udana loss of activity, immunity, strength and
complexion or even death occurs, In such case the patient should be sprinkled
slowly with cold waters consoled and_ given all comforts.
When apana is covered by prana, disorders such as vomiting, dyspnoea etc.
occur. In such case enema etc. and carminative diet should be given.
When prana is covered by apna, mental confusion, diminution of digestive
fire and diarrhoea are observed. It should be managed with emesis and appetising
and astringent diet.
Vomiting, tympanitis, udivarta, gulma, distress and cutting pain are the
symptoms in apna covered by vyana. It should be carminated with unctuous
measures.
When vyana is covered by apana there is excessive discharge of stool, urine
and semen, Here also astringent measures are applied.
In vyana covered by samana, fainting, drowsiness, delirium, malaise, loss
of agni, immunity and strength are found. In such case, physical exercise and light
| food is prescribed.
Tn vyina covered by udana, there are stiffness, poor digestion, absence of
sweating, loss of activity and closing of eyes. In such case ( the patient should be
| advised to take ) wholesome, measured and light food.
Thus five types of vata with mutual covering should be known ftom the
i] ( above ) symptoms.
As a general observation, in the state of covering there occurs diminution or
f aggravation in normal function of these types of vata.
\ Thus the eight types of covering have been mentioned above broadly with
; symptoms and treatment for adding to the knowledge of the wise. [ 206-216 ]


[PAGE 29]

XXVIli} CHIKITSASTHANAM
euarraes ariat ats aft a RATT | RES Ul
BIN aT PTAA S eT faraaay, | gaigerareae arte BAT? WARE
i at AMANATACAT |
should also diagnose the other twelve types of covering of
ase in functions. Accordingly
‘The physi
vita looking to their location and increase ot decrea
age, intake of uncting
[ 217-218 1
he should decide the line of treatment and apply mass
enema etc. or hot and cold measures alternately.
ard ated aaa URS
aad gaara Gra art F arse | arone cere (TF
aq card WAAAA TAA, faavrena,|
substance,
ra mer feafaniat tt X20 Ui
samana in the middle and
Udana should be led upwards, apana downwards,
prana should be
vyana in all these three directions. In comparison to the four,
protected carefully because its location in its normal position is essential, Thus there
covered and having gone to wrong course should be brought back to their normal
positions. [ 219-220 ]
sat ate am: ae Faare aftaanrfirat It 28 Il
wid a Peer at frereraraa | dat sqaerrefavarete grasa: Ut 385M
ae caret smrecafereatfea oleate «Suit Ie eLT ar UN R820
Rates arearga fardad | aad TOMA Fas TATA! It Frc)
aaei aremracaraferettosrrt | aaeazETM art Aset ayafata al Beall
frags aA eareTateeTaT AT: | aan afeard a sraedetaa a ll BREN
aera SATA SareTTATTE arfraftaan | sara ferarat J Sete: alent: Bar Ul 229 Il
mafaarag aaa Tage | Feat aqgararnt aaersafetat Ga Ml 286
samt enae foe cifraqenanstarn: | ETAT atv aaNet
fg freraasart coreranrferartre | frapantaeTers TIAA | 20 Ut
Req GTASTR HALT TTA: |
Fainting, burning sensation, giddiness, pain,
cold, vomiting of half-burnt food are the symptoms of prina covered by pitta.
Spitting, sneezing, belching, respiratory disorders, anorexia and vomiting are
the symptoms of prana covered by kapha.
Fainting etc. ( as said above ), burning sensation in navel and chest,
exhaustion, deterioration of ojas and malaise are the symptoms of udana covered
by pitta.
Ifudana is covered by kapha,
in speech and voice, debility, heaviness in body and anorexia.
PM RRS
burning in stomach, liking for
there are abnormal complexion, obstruction


[PAGE 30]

484 CARAKA-SAMHITA (CH. i
Excessiva sweating, thirst, burning sensation, fainting, restlessness, affliction
caused by heat. are the symptoms of samana covered by pitta. Absence of sweating,
poor digestion, horripilation and excessive coldness of body parts are the symptoms
of samana covered by pitta.
Absence of sweating, poor digestion, horripilation and excessive coldness of
body parts are the symptoms of of samana covered by kapha.
If vyana is covered by pitta, there are burning sensation all over the body,
exhaustion, restricted mouements of body, pyrexia and pain.
Heaviness in body, pain in all joints and bones, pronounced restriction of
movements are the symptoms in vyana covered by kapha.
Deep yellow colour of urine and stool, heat in anus and penis, excessive
menstrual discharge are the symptoms of apana covered by pitta. In apana covered
by kapha, stool is passed as broken, associated with ama and kapha ( mucus ), and
heavy and-there is also appearance of kaphaja meha. [ 221-230 J
saorat g frered frrea a wHea aI R28 II
sqaea fafa Rramaced ata! area aeanhafse cart ated Feat ze 1
Re maha sania gettat aanhraes | arat Beafrrveat sot Agra gH AA
adtqedta ceafta farts: meres’: | Rratersitfea sit sqrt efit aoa | X22
eae: Ceararergra aera Tasctasafteran: afteaeercreTa | 2 I
SIAM: SALA TSTHAT: |
Observing the mixture of pitta and kapha the learned physician should decide
the case as of mixed covering.
If the place defined for each type of vata is inhabited by other two dosas
( pitta and kapha ), they exhibit various types of disorders as of own.
The learned physician take prana and udana covered by kapha and pitta
as serious,
Particularly life is dependent on prana and so is strength on udana, Hence
due to their affliction, there is loss of life and strength ( respectively ).
All of them if not diagnosed properly, continue for a year and neglected or
managed improperly become incurable. [ 231-235 ]
eatin Piaf: get Teatseterc ca FT tl RBM
mere raret rraaarae eRe | TRTTTTAT Ga: qaaeitaeraa ll 229 lt
agennes aaa fata Serosha atl Prater: seyret TATA Il RR Ul
afaeafahtr Rath teat ahemret: | aenfrenfired seer arage ree Il 2 Il
eqearara a seargy ey WUE ATER Fees, | ara ETA MTA AGT: AGATA | RV Ul


[PAGE 31]

XXVIIE } CHIKITSASTHANAM 485
Sqiteaatedasareay. fea | ceraarat SATA: TeTETa tt RVE I
deer aatsead wre gasterat | Se at actamemeray MegEre: Il WR Il
amametittetagaearrad agags ea fet arf | AeseTn 223 1
arergatt we carafraitaany | ef etc: stenarzarat fafafeerasy tt eee 11
srordtat hres galteard aaa ag | fread ¢ frersaterenaefate: 11 22411
Due to neglect of covered vatas, cardiac disorder, abscess, spleen enlargement,
gulma anddiarrhoea appearas complications, Hence the physician should identify the
covering of the five types of vata by vata, pitta or kapha and then prescribe the
proper remedy for the same.
In case of vata covered in all places one should administer immediately the
carmination for vata with unctuous substances which do not block the channels but
are cleanser of them and are not antagonistic to kapha and pitta.
Sustaining enemas mostly sweet ones along with unctuous enema should be
applied but if pronounced strength is observed mild purgative should be given.
In these cases, the use of all rasayana formulations is commended such as
the regular use of silajatu or guggulu with milk.
Or the patient should use regularly the formulation delivered by Bhargava
( cyavanapraga ) keeping on milk diet or the ¢leven formulations mentioned in the
chapter on haritaki, amalaki etc, ( ci-1.1 ) should be used with wholesome diet.
If there is covering by apana, the entire remedy consists of appetising, astrin-
gent, carminative for wind and cleansing of bowels.
‘Thus the treatment of covered vatas prana etc. is said in brief physician
should apply them after thinking himself.
In covering by pitta one should apply remedies alleviating pitta which are
not antagnostic to vata, In that by kapha kapha-alleviating and wind-carminative
remedies should be administered. [ 236-245 ]
HS gestae ghar aa afk | ae Wa ater freer s HET gs It we Ml
As in Universe the movement of air, sun and moon is difficult to be known
so is that of vata, pitta and kapha in the body. [ 246 ]
ad afe aad a adqract fase! era qaardtat asqula wg ii 220 11
Physician knowing diminution, aggravation, equilibrium and covering of vata
etc, does not get confused in therapeutic. [ 247 ]


[PAGE 32]

CARAKA-SAMHITA,
aa art —
qa eqaamrestt carafa sation a Zeta: |
wetada: gfaaer they eartg aay gatsgaer Il Ree I
sive: storgat atta far a aarafaet feat!
at Quemaqasaes  satateoraaargant Il Res tl
Now the summing up verses—
Locations and functions of vayu which is of five types and which supports the
body, vitiating causes, disorders produced by vata, the lord of vital breath when
vitiated, covered or uncovered, in different organs in living beings and their entire
treatment has been said (in this chapter ) which should be applied by the one
following the views of the scripture after considering place, suitability, season and
strength. [ 248-249 ]
waftaet at acanftrdeatsoa ecasagita fafa
srasatfafatiteed armrerfiaitseara: | %< U
Thus ends the twenty eighth chapter on treatment of vatika disorders in
Cikitsasthana in the treatise composed by Agniveéa, redacted by
Garaka and reconstructed by Drdhabala
#8 it was not available. ( 28 )
qataferattseata:
CHAPTER XXIX
aarat areentfirataf tert sarearera Il & It
Now (I) shall expound the chapter on treatment of vatasonita. [ 1 ]
af © Sire rag: 1 ZA
As propounded by Lord Atreya. [ 2 ]
amg ariga | gear qetarrafeaatstrateg | 3
dateniaramt: |\tqeeriwarae = gece 8 tl
panini l feeenregarquatattoararse tl
2 | geancarsettca mage Ut & tl
1 mam | epartot — Rreragentrara | 9 1
aaemanaftarat goat areattfirrsy | afrerareyam a ee Ttforet ores tt < Hl


[PAGE 33]

—————x———— ttt
XXIX } CHIKITSASTHANAM. 487
UTA ATTRACT | eigaearananternatert wail
gem arereaTAATZaaraTaTeAAee | aghast Tea caaratita: aft tt to Ul
sey cage oe arc, | ge AeTRTeTENRTATETE st TAA: £8 |
Agnivesa submitted to his teacher purnarvasu having brilliance like fire and |
concentration of mind and who, havin; finished his fire-worhip, was seated amidst
the sages. Thereafter the teacher told him about the etiology, symptoms and
treatment of the combination of vayu and rakta which is like that of fire and wind,
Due to intake of diet consisting of salty, sour, pungent, alkaline, fatty, hot
and uncooked articles; moist or dried things, meat of aquatic and marshy animals, !
oil-cakes, radish, horse gram, black gram, nispava, other { leguminous ) vegetables,
sesamum paste, sugar canc, curd, sour gruel, sauvira, gukta (vinegars ), buttermilk,
sura, dsava, incompatible food, eating during indigestion, anger, day-sleep,
vigils mostly in delicate persons who eat delicious things at pleasure and are
not in habit of walking vata-rakta aggravates. Besides, due to injury and non-
evacuation when blood is affected and the person indulges in food consisting of
astringent, pungent, bitter, little and rough items; fasting, journey on carts carried
by horses and camels, sporting in water, jumping, leaping; excessive travelling on
foot in hot season, sexual intercourse and suppression of urges the aggravated vata
having been obstructed in its passage by aggravated blood affects the entire blood.
This is known as vatasonita having synonyms as khuda, vatabalasa and adhy-
avata. [ 3-11]
wen ead Bet UATAHSH: TAAHTT: | geassat cart FHS BE Prarafe RRM
aera, TARTATS TACT TATA | mereacarg aerate Re TSU fra wean
qgeatred ged arearqaleaa | feat Frenigeead avert: aaa qari te
agate ged RRs TET TAT aftag | watts aareatent HET GTC TATA, It a4
Its seat is hands, feet, fingers and all joints. At first it confirms its rogt in
hands and feet and then spreads over the body.
Due to subtleness and pervasiveness of vayu and liquidity and flowingness of
blood it circulates all over the body through blood vessels. Being obstructed in
joints due to zigzag way it gets located there with agitation and in combination
with pitta etc. causes respective afflictions. Hence it produces pain mostly in those
very joints and as such patient suffers from respective pain very difficult to
a tolerate. [ 12-15]
aaaisend a ar ered eaataed Baslrse,| abatitreanrsed eet frestaa: 1 U8 I
argugtanzdamernareatag | Freda: eget Fat qed afta auto!


[PAGE 34]

488 CKA-SAMHITARAA
aug: dfig anger yea aealt aread | fait avedteafeatareagezony tl &
Excess or absence of perspiration, blackness, anaesthesia, severe pain on injury,
laxity in joints, lassitude, malaise, appearance of boils, piercing pain, quivering,
tearing, heaviness, numbness and itching in knee, shanks, thigh, waist, shoulder, hands,
feet and joints of body; unstable pain in joints, abnormal complexion and appearance
of patches—these are the prodromal symptoms of vatarakta. [ 16-18 ]
sara wee faked aq saad | ceatarmaqardt ane FRATAA | 1S I
wugqeamaaalgegrngys: | aaa earacet evar areat aaa 1 Ro 11
weft? saga: eaoa: aisatsradentaara | earaettatsaat qCAEHGLNTUHATA | RR A
afiaqattadtsHtect ag: arafearsig | fez arearaamigaa amar | X21
waft ad og’ ar adit adaera | aifSea fad araramaarray, tl 23 I
This is said as of two types—superficial and deep. The former is located in
twak and marpsa while the latter in deeper dhatus, i
In external (superficial ) type the skin is blackish, red or coppery and
is associated with itching, burning sensation, pain, stretching, piercing pain, quive-
ring and contraction.
Tn deep type, there is swelling, stiff and hard, with severe pain inside, blackish
or coppery, having burning sensation, piercing pain, quivering and inflammation,
‘associated with distress and burning in stomach. Vayu moves with force frequently
in joints, bones and marrow as if cutting and making them crooked produces limping
or lameness while moving all over the body. Ifall the above symptoms are found
vatarakta should be known as located in both ( superficial as well as deep ). [ 19-23 ]
oe arash at cares Me wale at ay GHG TE AEE SET II Re I
faite: Ueitaeg mre det @ qaraarafereraat 3 11
erat agratsemaisher | gareaaa itasdeaneshas | Re 11
em, Tears hatte | fered: ei aR wuggaitadtsate ll 29 1
Feed Saan eat Steere ag waar | cre: green Haar sitet BARE Re Hl
edfired cited ate: gine ae a wR | tasuncanttxararafatrsa, 11 2 11
Now listen about the symptoms which are found in predominance of vata,
rakta, pitta or kapha, or in combination of two or three dosas.
Particularly dilatation of vessels, pain, quivering and piercing pain, blackness,
roughness, blackishness, aggravation and diminution, contraction in dhamanis
( arteries ), fingers and joints, stiffness in body parts, intense pain, contracture and
stiffness, aversion to cold—these symptoms are in predominance of vata.


[PAGE 35]

XXIX]
CHIKITSASTHANAM 489
In prepominance of rakta, there is swelling with severe distress and piercing
pain, coppering, with pricking sensation, not subsiding by either unctuous or rough
ations and associated with itching and moistening.
In paittika type there are burning after meals, pain, fainting, sweating, thirst,
narcosis, giddiness, redness, inflammation, tearing and dryness.
applic:
In ( predominance of ) kapha there are feeling of wetness, heaviness, unctuous-
ness, numbness and mild pain.
‘That caused by combinations of two or three dogsas should be known by
combined etiology and symptoms. [ 24-29 |
axdtarast avd ad, aed fears | fataamared eared + ETSITT I Ro Ul
eae aaa ARATE: | qeotaneRmUMeaemtETaTHe Ut 38 Ut
femrargerdiatarnateaagat | agdianat — eRtet qremimeraat: ll 32 Ul
aieagaact MAARA TST Aq! anata frat a exraraqes aT Ba
qaaeaa datanciaezaati | aecdtard aed and eateries | 38 ll
‘The discase which is new and caused by one doa is curable, that caused by
two dogas is maintainable and the one caused by three dosas as well as with
complications is incurable.
Sleeplessness, anorexia, dyspnoca, gangrene, stifiness in head, fainting,
narcosis, distress, thirst, fever, mental confusion, trembling, hiccup, lameness,
erysipclas, inflammation, piercing pain, giddiness, exhaustion, crookedness in
fingers, blisters, burning sensation, stiffness in vital parts, tumours—these are the
complications which make the disease as incurable or even one complication,
mental confusion, is enough for the same.
‘The disease should be rejected which is discharging profusely, With deranged
colour, stiff, causing growths, contractures and damage to senses.
‘The one having less than all symptoms js maintainable while that which is
free from complications is curable. [ 30-34 ]
cent rear ararafag ated! faPreneatermrart Agana teat tt Bt
aa qeaqas aRadtmasITTahe | Reeat fecifrat carat qarresa | 2& I
® 5 ret TAT | RTT aaftrngfatafaaraara |! 29 1
Rareat aay red Farah: aegaa at | aaarat ag aed SH arate TTI RU
anit angeand aed argfacaart | zaifa arfa aagtat Falarca Tee II 38 I
argardta aati aed ATTA | gateenra catia Fara fafaata ieoll


[PAGE 36]

490 CARAKA-SAMHITA [ CH.
Vayu having obstructed. the passage of blood, enters into the joints - of
extremities and covering mutually takes away life with pain.
i
In such case blood should be let out with horn, leech, needle, bottle-gourd,
sacrifrying or venesection according to morbiditty and strength.
Blood should be taken out with leech from one suffering from distress, burning
| sensation, piercing pain and redness. One should take out blood from the patient
| having numbness, itching and prickly sensation with horns or bottlegourds. If the
disorder is shifting from place to place, it should be eliminated by venesection
i or scarifying.
In case the part is reduced and the patient is rough and with predominance
of vata, blood should not be let out.
Due to loss of blood, vayu produces deep swelling, stiffness, trembling,
disorders of ligaments and vessels, malaise and contractures. If blood is let out
excessively, vatika disorders such as limping etc. and death may occur. Hence
| one should eliminate blood in proper quantity from the patient who is properly
1 uncted. [ 35-40 ]
fiten defrarsst aagafitan: | stat age meanagafeard al 2t tl
Rarergezeraatan: weastaatteA: | ATT TTEA
At first the patient should be purgated after unction with unctuous or rough
Frequent application of enema should also be done. Besides,
mild purgatives.
od and uncting substance which do not cause
i sprinkling, massage, ointment, to
1 burning are recommended. [ 41 ]
fade g fata Fo eR
mrerareravagatadtaaran: | fatarearrretearsterftcarrae | 83 I
afietoaen 2 | geteneaattar aratacaarata Il 88 I
| fataddatcat: Ge: aafeate | ahafiatatianta. cafirdtet aq 1 64
| aad ag aread Seat Prog | Stent Barer Tens ara HATE Ut we I
| qqartet we sfek arretia | qreataesencghtate: | earTATAaT | 89 I
| cafrdtat ateigie: STsaqreng, | aacebaTaeas TreassareleMAT I Be Ut
{| Now listen the specific remedies, The external type should be treated with
pastes, massage, sprinkling and poultice while the deep one with purgation, non-
unctuons enema and intake of uncting substance.
\| One should overcome the disease predominant in vata with intake of ghee
oil, fat and marrow; massage, enema and comfortable hot poultices.


[PAGE 37]

XXIX } CHIKITSASTHANAM 491
One should overcome thedisorder predominant in rakta pitta with purgatives,
intake of ghee and milk, sprinkling, enema, cold refrigerents.
In vatarakta predominant in kapha, mild emesis, uncxcessive unctuous
application and sprinkling and warm pastes are useful.
In vatarakta predominant in kapha and vata, if cold pastes are applied
burning sensation, swelling, pain and itching aggravate duc to checking. Likewise,
in that predominant in raktapitta burning sensation, moistening and tearing occur
if hot things are applied. Hence the physician should apply measures after
considering the strength of morbidity. [ 42-48 ]
faareact adart qrant fad aarl azt yafacaeg camnes a asta I 421
geo aaingadtare: afestean | atest card at fafeacaaat feat tl 4° i
ASPAT ARI AAT: GARTHE | Ba agafiesn: saear araatfora tt 4k
atronnaamarmraiaaah: | agar aa | ata aa 4
wanted maar at | sraard, var wed Hearst wat fea 42
afa digger: ste aracafaPafiaen | cata ga: aa sarea: doaeae Ul 42 UI
The patient should abstain from day sleep, exposure to heat, physical
exertion, coitus, eating of pungent, hot, heavy, channcl-blocking, salty and
sour things.
For food, old cereals of barley, wheat, nivara, ali and sastika rice and for
meat soup gallinaceous and pecking birds are wholesome. In vatarakta, soups of
pigeon pea, bengal gram, lentils and makusthaka added with plenty of ghee are
commended, Those who are suited to vegetables should be given the vegetables of
sunisannaka, tip of vetra, kakamiaci, Satavari, vastuka, upodika and suvarcala fried
with ghee and meatsoup in milk, cow’s, buffalow’s and goat’s milk is beneficial.
Thus treatment of vatarakta is said briefly, The same will be said again
entirely with details. [ 49-54 ]
amidicnatdittantr: ai fat ange: aft aaitt aracegg 441
asiafaaat Rarareagat waracty | arate etcaratat cease a Fea 4G 1
gd sadodit _ 3: fae aacaga | ceamginrtadama sacar Il 4s Ul
safest arrest aratet carat | atten sentir toga 4 Ut
qeN WeTErARE grat aa | Taflagral: ear” aan até aquiony 4S
aaa srattrs aft: qrevafits eaeeg | aac wat aitet teat Gre sat 1 Go 11
wf qrera Tey |
Ghee cooked with equal quantity of sravani, ksirakakoli, jivaka, rsabhaka and
madhuka along with milk alleviates vatarakta.


[PAGE 38]

CARAKA-SAMHITA { CH.
One should pound bala, atibala, meda, kapikacchu, satavari, kakoli, ksirak-
akoli, rasnd and rddhi. with this paste and four times milk ghee should be cooked.
It alleviates vatarakta and also cardiac disorders, anaemia, erysipelas, jaundice and
fever.
Ghee should be cooked with the paste of trayamana, tamalaki, kakoli,
ksirakakoli, Satavari and kageruka and also decoction of the same drugs adding
thereto the juices of parusaka, draksa, kaSmarya, sugar cane and vidari in equal
quantity and milk four times, This useful ghee is known as ‘Parusaka ghrta’
efficacious in vatarakta, wasting due to chest wound, crysipelas and paittika
fever. [ 55-60 ]
( Thus Parusaka ghrta ). |
& waqeadhyacd aqadad | qari aera arent waradig ee II
Raia camaast acer! gaffes gar saat Faget tl 83 1
Waa BAT aiearigesrar, Tala | Gareha Sates aadahnar wa ner
ReRTAAT AZ RAAT TTATA, leaaatttt feeaat grat waaist gaaang it &e II
amt dicaratet wr Tedtea| atch rages AeA EATT faaterny 1&4 1
ag watzaamaaatagaiern | oadaek fae dtd afta sqaq eeu
aers fad a fear aad afrareag | sacarfata aa oratgadfray, ti eo
qogitt sat feat eating TTA | GSTS ad are Shere areata, i &< I
aaatrareRcaeret aad aan aalgaetinia gaa a ATTA | & Ul
asanat owed adiafsaaag| Sadtiafd «= -afarer TEMTGANG | 901
afa shaciagar |
Two paiicamulas (daSamula ), varsabht, eranda, punarnava, midgaparni,
mahameda, masaparni, Satavari, Samkhapuspi, adhahpuspi, rasna, atibala and bala-
each 80 gm. should be boiled in water 10.24 litres reduced to one-fourth, Now
milk, juice of amalaka and sugarcane, soup of goat’s flesh should be added thereto
along with ghee 2.56 kg. and the whole thing should be cooked on mild fire added
with the paste of the following drugs—meda, mahameda, kasmarya fruits, utpala,
twakksiri, pippali, draksa, lotus seeds, punarnava, Sunthi, ksirakakoli, padmaka,
brhati, kantakari, vira, Srigataka, bhavya, urumana, nikocaka, kharjura, aksota,
vatdma, muiijata and abhisuka. When ghee is prepared and cooked, honey should
be added thereto and the preparation should be stored well-protected in a clean
container after observing the prescribed ritual for protection. The dose of 10 gm.
should be administered. This ‘jivaniya-ghrta’ alleviates anaemia, fever, hiccup,
hoarseness of voice, fistula-in-ano, pain in sides, wasting, cough, spleen enlargement,
vatarakta, consumption due to chest-wound, epilepsy, calculus, gravels, vatika
disorders generalized or localised and retention of urine. It promotes strength,


[PAGE 39]

XXIX] CHIKITSASTHANAM 493
complexion, auspiciousness, removes wrinkles and greying of hairs, is aphrodisic and
provides progeny even to a sterile woman. [ 61-70 ]
( Thus Jivaniya ghrta ).
+ Rag at afaataa | fara war até GeteaTea za Ml Sk
Raves Rat waite Tara AEs YT aRaARA TIGR MI
qearreaatiett | ZA gqadat | aaraat fart + VATPTEAATT: | 93 Il
at earncnteat afters a anata | Sea qatast aaa TaeRTA, | Ve Ul
sregafite cerca ae fest aera firera, | erazetind afta caret ateiet TAS UI 6's Ut
‘One should take ghee cooked with decoction of drakst and madhuka along
with sugar candy or with milk and juice of gudiaci.
Fivaka, rsabhaka, media, rsyaprokta, Sativari, madhuka, madhuparni, kakoli,
ksirakikoli, mudgaparni, masaparni, dé
a$wagandha, pisanabheda—with dec: drugs ghee and oil
anil if available fat and marrow of wild, pecking and gallinaccous birds should be
cooked along with four times milk. This, when pre ared, alleviates vatarakta and
severe vatika disorders pertaining to the entire borly. [71-75 ]
fear sadgt gaat area auaradt | areaatoateagat a zeit Bas aati sel
agi aa aqeit gaa, as TETTA! Raraarattafestardtshianea: I 9 Ul
aaat Arar aa: atefraosendaraset | asta afaat fat atach FgtaH 1 oe |
Sour aac a waa gaat | aficiafaaritatiet asta faa ot 11 98 U1
siege 22a: ea: TAR faferatas: | ast revert aaa froaetarart: 22a co Ul
agmartcrargays: adight | gamizesteacfiees atatfae xd ga: i ce Ul
anit gags at att argateae | fragt alegre fracargatias: | 22
gitareoste at vation feta: | aean fated stir aftdtqarart <2 Ul
aaa at gad fda: | aieecort fagargit grace atl ce
rend Ragat grat Pamast aowtne | 224 feifatart samatzagae Il
Pamaran: waved at fader alton cigars | arttefearqearat aura ar anthers: tc Ul
Hie wafafacaad Ptaar! azhe aedqaeta att asraA ll 29 Il
Oil and ghee should be cooked scparataly with decoction of Salaparni,
goksura, brhati, sariva, kagmarya fruits, kapikacchy, vrécira, bala and atibala with
four times milk and paste of meda, atdvari, madhuyasti, jivanti, jivaka and
rsabhaka. Taking adequate dose from it should be mixed in three times milk and
one and half times sugar and the whole thing should be churned with a stick. This
should be taken in vatarakta caused by three dosas. In the same way, oil, milk
and sugar mixed together should be taken or milk mixed with ghee, oil, sugar and
honey should be taken.
mula, punarn: bala, amrta, vidari,
tion and paste of these


[PAGE 40]

CARAKA-SAMHITA [ CH.
Milk 640 ml. boiled with Salaparni and added with 80 gm. sugar is recomme-
nded for drink. Likewise, that boiled with pippali and sunthi is useful.
Milk boiled with bala, Satavari, rasna, dasamila, pilu, Syama, eranda and
Salaparni alleviates vatika disorders,
The patient suffering from vata covered with pitta and rakta should take
warm fresh milk mixed with cither cow’s urine or powder of trivrt_ which climinates
the impurity.
Onc having much impurity should take castor oil with milk for purgation
regularly and-after digestion should take diet of milk and rice.
Or one should take decoction of haritaki fried with ghee or powder of
trivrt with milk or grape juice.
The decoction of kagmarya fruit, trivrt, draksa, triphala and parusaka added
with salt and honey should be taken for purgation. ai
If there is predominance of kapha, one should take decoction of triphala or
Amalaki, haridra and musta added with honey.
In case vata is covered with faeces, the patient should be purgated frequently
with formulations mentioned in kalpasthana which should be mild and added with
some uncting substance. [ 76-87 ]
feta nd aeq aga: aivaftafin: 1a fe afeaedt fafearacafalateea i cc
aadanqvaterateansatag | eqrat a mead ree ATgareat: Il <8 U1
andar aaa afeanifr afar aeanaaaag  eaetrarad il 80 1
wamaieqarres BO Tas | Aares aaett gaa mem: Tata. RI
magenattatwenmaag: | feacrdandtatettfararngatita: 1 82
aiaidteieastdiaaasatcara: | stantastacdiernasreraraé: ll 33 11
sdtvstinnfamrentastaqgaas: | aasratmrsta as areaanforery tl ee
aud areas adarrgt sari aereattaqerticaced —wesacted ti 41
wf agaligtar |
Or his excrements should be eliminated by administering milk enemas mixed
with ghee. There is no treatment of vatarakta equal to enema.
Non-unctuous and unctuous enemas are commended in case of pain in
pelvis, groin, sides, thighs, joints, bones and abdomen and of udavarta.
The wise physician should administer the following oils as enema and also
as snuff, massage and sprinkling for pacification of burning sensation and pain.


[PAGE 41]

CHIKITSASTHANAM 495
Madiipdegt (madhuka) 4 kg. should be decocted in water reduced to one-fourth.
Now with this decoction oil 2.56 kg. should be cooked with equal quantity of milk
and the paste of the following drugs each 40 gm.—Satapuspi, Satavari, muirva, payasya,
aguru, candana, Silaparni, hamsapadi, mamsi, meda, mahameda,madhuparni, kakoli
ksirakakoli, timalaki, rddhi, padmaka, jivaka, rsabhaka, jivanti, twak, patra,
nakha, bilaka, prapaundarika, maiijistha, sariva, aindri and vitunnaka. This oil
used in four ways ( intake, massage, snuff an enema ) alleviates yatarakta associa-
ted with complications, pain in body and involving whole body. It destroys vata
rakta, pitta, burning sensation, distress and fever and promotes strength and
complexion. [ 88-95 ]
( Thus Madhuparnyadi taila ),
AGA Ua Aral ag citar WETHH | wrRTAIUPA aed BATA | I
arnaentaaaga Faz | aiseatr qa a afeaetaret wes i
aUISSHBRREATATATa: aa: baggie wae ret zat neta ueet
BPAUASTASIMAAHACTA | ARISR zRAT sam fast farang ee,
stadia dfs dlgseia daay! aaa aeat arly fratAAT Ui Yoo It
pi wag araterth cane |
eRIea a arta wasaT Il Lot
Bw cle leqeaiat — Aaarteaasgfoss tl (02 II
afa qpacaden |
agat wat eet qaqe gata | ceaicesqed a stadia ora: 1) 003 I
qa waaaiaaengad val arefeaaaearargecatateR rary toe tl
arematat gavnrat tot Ztornaswafe | ara at att wast a PATI L411
aeatet qaaa azar aay wa: | fagr faafer aa aeqateh CHT Ul {0% I
wrataepetta ant agate | afagecd aa aq fad araatiray | {os II
arate aaeit aed atotafa | avaraqaamt aalgarectrong I toc 11
Raia waa! ea saad AateeatasaeaT |i ott
werd A271!
Madhuka 4 kg., draksi, kharjara, parusaka, madhika, odanapaki and
muiijataka each 640 ¢m., kasmary fruits 2.56 kg.—all these should be boiled in
water 40.96 litres reduced to onc=zighth, This should be filtered and with: this
oil 2.56 kg. should be cooked added with equal quantity of the juices of amalaka,
kaSmarya, vidari and sugarcane and 40.96 litres of milk and the paste of the
following drugs 40 gm. cach—kadamba, imalaka, aksota, lotus seeds, kaSeruka,
Smgataka, Sunthi, lavana, pippali, Sarkara, and vitaliser drugs, When it is pre-
pared honey 640 gm. should be added thereto. This should he applied as snuff,


[PAGE 42]

496 CARAKA-SAMHITA (CH.
massage, intake and encma in all vatika disorders, stiffness of neck, lockjaw, vata
generalised or localised, wasting and fever due to chest wound. This ‘Sukumaraka
taila’ alleviates vatarakta, promotes voice and complexion and provides health,
strength and corpulence.
( Thus Sukumaraka taila ).
Guduci, madhuka, laghu paficamila, punarnava, rdsna, cranda root and
vitaliser drugs whichever available each 4 kg., bala 20 kg. kola, bilya, barley, black
gram and horse gram each 2.56 kg. and kasamarya fruits well dried 10.24 kg. well
crushed and washed should be boiled in water 1024 litres reduced to 40.96 litres,
with this decoction oil 10,24 litres should be cooked added with five times milk
and the paste of candana, usira, nagakesara, patra, ela, aguru, kustha, tagara and
madhuyasti each 120 gm. and maiijistha 320 gm. this oil when prepared is useful
in all ways in vatarakta, wasting due to chest wound, affiiction by overload,
deficiency of semen, trembling, convulsions, fractures and diseases generalised
or localised. This known as ‘Amrta’ is the best among oil and alleviates diseases
of female genital track, epilepsy, insanity, limping and lameness and makes delivery
of foetus easy. [ 96-109 ]
( Thus Amrtadya taila ).
qudaaEMRAaIIRIes: | Tara iasrargabayT ll Ro Ii
se owt Gasianed aficcifnag | dtaarctastaitestamdasat Ue
aqardtsansrahRACTTg: | aitvstiemrnaniaiaaiaghr: tt
SRA wetda afser: wa al aaa Ad MARESATATTAT It 223
aft aera faq |
Padma ( padmaka ), vetasa, madhuyasti, phenila, kamala, utpala, darbha,
bala, candana and kiméuka each 200 gm. should be decocted in water. With this
decoction oil 6.40 gm. should be cooked with equal quantity of sauvira (a type of
viregar ) with the paste of lodhra, kaliyaka, usira, jivaka, rsabhaka, nagakeéara,
padmaka, prapaundarika, kasmarya, mamsi, meda, priyaiigu and kumkuma 20 gm.
and majijistha 40 gm. This ‘Mahapadma(ka) taila’ alleviates vatarakta and
fever. [ 110-113 ]
(‘Thus Mahapadma(ka) taila ).
qwatetceaecatterratar | eae fe: adaferdicaatatargs: i Ce 1
Qeeqwaitg Fe qereaqes |
af quran Aaa


[PAGE 43]

———
XXIX) CHIKITSASTHANAM 497
Oil prepared with the decoction of padmaka, ufira, madhuyastt and haridra
along with the paste of sarja, maiijistha, vita, kakoli and candana. This
‘khuddaka padmaka taila’ alleviates vatarakta and burning sensation. [ 114 ]
( Thus Khuddaka padmaka taila )
waite afer aed TTT Ta MA
afi aqgta wqner waa qi fat AYMARA TACHA | WE
aqua: 1 fagt Acad aga | att aved ad Beat ata AYHTEs! li Ceo
fad 24 RT enaava saTTHIaATT | Po MSU CIR IR CAC CILIA. GURL
afa aaa agadey!
Madhuyasti 4 kg. should be boiled with ten times milk ( reducea to one
fourth ), with this, oil 40.96 kg. should be cooked with the paste of madhuka
, 40 gm. or with the juice of madhuka and kagmarya. It alleviates vatarakta.
Oil 640 gm. should be cooked with the paste of madhuparni (madhuka) 40 gm.
in four times milk. ‘This should be repeated hundred times. Thus it is processed
with 100 pala (4 kg.) of madhuka. It should be used in vatarakta caused by
three dosas Besides, it alleviates dyspnoea, cough, cardiac disorders, anaemia,
erysepilas, jaundice and burning sensation. [ 115-118 ]
( Thus Madhuka taila cooked hundred times ).
L aqmaaeeenat Ad diced Waa! cee Taare Al STATA, tt RRS, ll
camate aofataaot carga! stad geot SAS DRPATATTT tt 8Ro tl
| eases aaa at sate!
Oil should be cooked with decoction and paste of bala with equal quantity
| of milk hundred or thousand times. It alleviates vatarakta and vatika disorders.
It is an excellent rasayana, cleanser of senses, vitaliser, bulk-promoting, promoter
Pa of voice and alleviator of the defects of semen arid ovum. { 119-120]
( Thus Balataila cooked hundred or thousand times ).
| agdtcagearat Ae grace at fest wgearrdcal aracnag ll x48 tl
crearatee Reh orqersicd maaeq ge afkrd aT sacar TAM ARE!
Oil prepared with the juice of gudOct and milk or with grape juice or with
juice of madhuka and kaSmarya alleviates vatarakta.
* Oil cooked in sour gruel 2.56 litres with one-fourth sarjarasa and churned in
plenty of water is an excellent alleviator of fever, burning sensation and dis-
tress. [ 121-122 ]
3211


[PAGE 44]

498 CARAKA-SAMHITA {CH.
angiounfas aesicaanftag | fiwead «— aqraRtqaraemaarreat Ml tRR \
\
Oil prepared with beewax, maifijistha, sarjarasa and sariva bi known as ‘pinda
taila’ which alleviates pain in vatarakta by massage. [ 123 ]
( Thus Pinda taila ).
qaqed att aa: qafrarcog| afttstsfess’t aaa steite after ul 628 I
Stagdtat aahk: viata | earaengqa setae a aftaa (4 1
aaqaenfiasatt: aitetefatiia: | artat stattart wees at fara |. (II
gtagranas sfraeacahenn | aad aegsateaatey a Tea Il ks I
gatas: aagt: | aadtargiade Maal eqated fea tee
equarqdat «=o dtaangasat i cat gftsaeaetaitamreaditfnt 11 23.
arqageaaacn: frat ara: freiage | eaataitar qaeoat ala are st HAA Le I
aut aed ae ca freer Satq aqEvacereateldtageacanas: 1 WAL
setiaqiat aavameengi: | atic stadiat fesasfiarega 022
fer frat waa fa ae a aaa! asta wat fae: sem grecrTag | 833 UI
adtesdianfasradiagaarat: | faatesenrarqaaceteara: | We Ul
BN aqedtatctaarn: | fracatat BA, Bary aratat zg 1 824 A
aac: enfiter fare: Gert arava: | Aseatafeosatserrarel Sarge: | AE I
waareerqaara: ges istatatea: Gagan eqeqare? ii 22911
earatgenanttangaearrar: | ftadtates: fest aaaent qTarsfa aril tee 11
ad aeacras stadt cam 19 Ba fioracerrer vate fsa: as 1
aficlangat Sate Gas al gaged = waretafressfas i tuo i
aqemesiesat fanart gaa! gt ad aat ast aTaTETaROT 1 fet I
gent stadia. aed atc | aftdtasgboramevaereaget tl (ee |
feeanraa gan god Hed aaa ania | wTsaIsTAdt qaredasaattes ti Gea Ul
qsats haat Su ahansshs | rach sgR AA AI HER aT TEI | Wee Il
aitntancatge wafer watat) qrarcgess Garraee fea tes
que ca Grae arftar af Agen | fas argas ear Aaeay HHT tl Wee A
aratd vat qt gd a aga: za GRA gees Tas HHT ll Wao
3a: atafeardicendittastea: | ae: fae: afrraergaait: wear: i tec
yea Ta SE Tate cgi set: = Asqaas aTawRTae | Lee
art aa Taras SE qed etyet | ae cama arsed arrange ll Ce I
watienféd aacdist araaifran | age feareoer Restarrnatrsr tl U4 Ul
fasettritsranaitiiiers aam,| reg feadtys Qast genera tt (48
af armeat aod aerannft Awte | wea) fsanaerst areas aettera tN UR A
asttefigant art Fahad ql grave waTASH fet ass Ge UN Ye I


[PAGE 45]

—=————
XXIX) CHIKITSASTHANAM 499
area earaferaatat qarmt a sas! fataRaatat gaiqertratanetag tt 0% w
In case with predominance of vata milk boiled with dagamula removes pain
immediately. Similar is sprinkling with warm ghee.
One suffering from stiffness, convulsion and pain should be sprinkled over
with four fats processed with sweet drugs warmly or coldly in case of burning
sensation.
Similarly milk of cow, sheep and goat mixed with oil or docoction of vitaliser
drugs or paficamila should be used for sprinkling. ‘
Juice of grapes and sugar cane, wine, curd: water, sour gruel, water of rice
honey and sugar are also useful for sprinkling.
In case of burning sensation, sponging and contact with flowers of kumuda,
utpala ( water lily ), lotus ete., necklace of gems and sandal pieces immersed in cold
water is beneficial.
‘The patient lying on a bed moistened with dews of moonrays covered with
flax and lotus leaves and fanned with breeze cooled by contact of sandy beach
should be attended by beloved and sweet-spoken women with their breasts and
hands pasted with sandal and with cold and pleasing touch who remove burning
sensation, pain and exhaustion.
In case of burning sensation associated with redness and pain blood-letting
should be done followed by application of paste of madhuka, agwattha bark, mamsi,
vira, udumbara and duirva.
Aquatic flowers ( lotus etc. ) or barley powder mixed with madhuyasti, milk
and ghee or that of jivaniya drugs mixed with ghee alleviates pain and burning
sensation.
Sesamum, priyala, madhuka, Jotus rhizome, vetasa root pounded with goat’s
oo milk and applied as paste relieve burning sensation and redness
Application of paste with prapaundarika, mafijistha, daruharidra, madhuka,
candana, sugar candy, eraka, parched grain flour, lentils, usira and padmaka
alleviates pain, burning sensation, eysipelas, redness and swelling.
The above applications are for the disease predominant in pitta and rakta.
Now listen about that applicable for the disorder predominant in vata.
Klara ( rice cooked with pulse ) and mudgapayasa (geen gram cooked in
milk ) processed with vata-alleviating drugs and added. with uncting substance or
bolus made of sesamum and muystard applied as poultice alleviate pain,


[PAGE 46]

500 CARAKA-SAMHITA (CH.
Preparation of vasavara made of the meat of aquatic, snatching and marshy
animals, well-processed with vitaliser drugs and added with uncting substance are
useful as poultice. These alleviate stiffness, piercing pain, distress, stretching,
swelling and immobility of body parts.
Similar is the fat cooked with vitiliser drugs along with milk.
Ghee, sahacara root, jivanti and goat’s milk are applied as paste.
Similarly pounded sesamum seeds roasted and immersed in milk should be
applied.
If there is predominance of vayu, paste should be applied of linseed pounded
with milk, castor seeds and Satahva for alleviating pain.
1.28 kg of each of ghee, oil, fat and marrow derived from marshy animals
and birds are cooked in decoction of eranda ( whole plant ), with the paste of
vitaliser drugs, cow’s and goat’s milk along with haridra, utpala, kustha, ela,
fatahva, leaves of karavira and flowers of kakubha each 40 gm. After
it is brought down and cooled, beewax 320 gm. should be added. It is
applicable as paste in bodyache, sandhivata, vatarakta, dislocation, fracture,
limping and humpedness.
If there is predominance of kapha and swelling, heaviness, itching etc., ghee
cooked with urine, alkali and wine is useful as massage.
Ghee cooked with padmaka, twak, madhuka and sariva along with
madhusukta ( a type of vinegar ) is useful as sprinkling and massage in
predominance of kapha.
Alkali, oil, cow’s urine and ghee processed with pungent drugs are beneticial
in vatarakta with predominance of kapha.
Similarly paste of mustard, nimba, arka, himsra, milk and sesamum or that of
kapittha bark, ghee and milk mixed with parched grain flour is useful,
Soot, vaca, kustha, fatahva, haridra, daruharidra—this paste alleviates pain
in vatarakta predominant in vata and kapha.
Tagara, twak, §Satahva, ela, kustha, musta, harenuka, devadaru and
vyaghranakha-these pounded with sour liquid and applied as pastes alleviate
ers of rakta.associated with yata and kapha.
larly the seeds of madhusigru pounded with sour gruel
and then washed with sour liq in that predominant


[PAGE 47]

XXIX) CHIKITSASTHANAM 501
‘Triphala, trikatu, patra, ela, tvakksiri, citraka, vaca, vidanga, pippalimila,
kasisa, vasa bark, pddhi, tamalaki and cavya—all in equal quantity should be
pounded.” The paste should be applied on an iron utensil in early morning and
eaten in noon. Curd, gukta (vinegar), alkali and incompatible food items should be
avoided. It is very efficacious in pain of vatarakta even caused by all
the dogas.
The above treatment should be applied by cne conversant in reasoning and
variation after considering specific positions and strength or otherwise of
dosas. [ 124-155 ]
gfe anieiiaraeat at wer at | afegeestars arat wet Beate, | ke
cavarmatnanicanprararsterts | aareeanseatetat aaa BHAT HI M9
airarsad g sfetergat wel aac sears Prataafa qraoray tt tc Il
qerorreningsefveateaegere | rerergeattas mydiaiener | TN R48
If vayu is vitiated due to blocking of passage by excessive aggravation of
medas and kapha, unction and bulk-promoting measures should not be-applied in
the beginning. Instead, kapha and medas should be diminished with physical
exercises, evacuation, intake of arista and urine, purgation and administration of
buttermilk and haritaki.
One should take decoction of agwattha with honey. It overcomes shortly
even severe vatarakta caused by three dogas,
Besides, ( kapha and medas should be diminished) by use of old cereals
of barley and wheat, sidhu, arista, sura, Asava ( fermented beverages ), silajatu,
guggulu and maksika. [ 156-159 ]
Teht cRATHT eqraaarrastag, | vaane fiat Bataacarangy | {ee Il
In deep type of the disease if blood is affected, it should be treated like vata.
Thereafter steps should be taken to pacify vatarakta. [ 160]
cafrarrawat g eng Pacae | Rt axaft at cat Rrqrd qa att ReL
wat: frat Rraaent Restaactadt: | gatgamarat & frat et earrftafiafterarray URERU
The disordered part, due to excessiv. aggravation of rakta and pitta, gets
dor torn discharging blood or immature pus. They should be treated
Jleansing and healing application.
infla
vit


[PAGE 48]

CARAKA-SAMHITA {CcH.
eas
ta carta As & wer ere afhag | gates se a aE fahenreT a aeOTE LER |
qatamer fig a aenftreaqarar: | ane qrearared a fing aremer after Utell
arercaea faffer aaracaraaean | aafiorsfiaara adarafeast fina 1 Re
Now the summing up verses—
Etiology, locations, root, reason for its prevalent aggravation in joints,
prodroma, symptoms of both the types, symptoms of different types, predominance
of dosas, complication, prognosis, management of the curable one and symptomatic
treatment-all this about vatarakta is described in brief and details by the great
sage for Agnivega.
vafriage at acanfrcena sma ecasdgha fatrareart araaitfita-
fafettad areatafretsera: 1 38 1
Thus ends the twenty ninth chapter on treatment of vatagonita in
Cikitsasthana in treatise composed by Agniveéa, redacted by
Caraka and reconstructed by Drdhabala as
it was not available. ( 29 )
fanitseara:
CHPATER XXX
samt atfeemrafafattead sareareata: tt 1
Now (1) shall expound the disorders of female genital tract. [ 1]
fe & ere aeaTaTRa: 11 2 I
As propounded by Lord Atreya. [ 2 ]
pan leak a tga) fewae? opt aefeaftafea 2
gated faerenanfeaetisg  qeara ile tl
ao: woe ae ee eee argarrent finre antenna 11 1
rentat aqaftqeart = seq! ated stare sxrareeeaa Il & Ul
af firetor queq Maraftadtshirs: | faaeataat aahifer enzo 11
freqrentar at: eit rgeardaa a sree Rare dtedtere sry ar gag <i)
Agnivesa again submitted to Punarvasu, self-controlled and seer of the ideas
of spiritual knowledge by virtue of penance, taking stroll in the pious outskirts of
